Anticholinergic Drugs and
Drugs Acting on Autonomic
GangliaChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 88888
ANTICHOLINERGIC DRUGS
(Muscarinic receptor antagonists,
Atropinic, Parasympatholytic)
Conventionally, the term ‘anticholinergic drugs’
is restricted to those which block actions of ACh
on autonomic effectors and in the CNS exerted
through muscarinic receptors. Though nicotinic
receptor antagonists also block certain actions of
ACh, they are generally referred to as ‘ganglion
blockers’ and ‘neuromuscular blockers’.
Atropine, the prototype drug of this class, is
highly selective for muscarinic receptors, but some
of its synthetic substitutes do possess significant
nicotinic blocking property in addition. The
selective action of atropine can easily be demon-
strated on a piece of guinea pig ileum where
ACh induced contractions are blocked without
affecting those evoked by histamine, 5-HT or other
spasmogens. The selectivity is, however, lost at
very high doses. All anticholinergics are compe-
titive antagonists.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Natural alkaloids Atropine, Hyoscine
(Scopolamine).
2.Semisynthetic derivatives Homatropine,
Atropine methonitrate, Hyoscine butyl
bromide, Ipratropium bromide, Tiotropium
bromide.
3.Synthetic compounds
(a)Mydriatics:  Cyclopentolate, Tropicamide
(b)Antisecretory-antispasmodics :
(i)Quaternary compounds: Propantheline,
Oxyphenonium, Clidinium, Pipenzolate
methyl bromide, Isopropamide, Glycopyr-
rolate.
(ii)Tertiary amines: Dicyclomine, Valetha-
mate,  Pirenzepine.(c)Vasicoselective: Oxybutynin, Flavoxate,
Tolterodine.
(d)Antiparkinsonian:  Trihexyphenidyl (Benzhe-
xol), Procyclidine, Biperiden.
In addition, many other classes of drugs, i.e.
tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines, anti-
histamines and disopyramide possess significant
antimuscarinic actions.
The natural alkaloids are found in plants of
the solanaceae family. The levo-isomers are much
more active than the dextroisomers. Atropine is
racemic while scopolamine is l-hyoscine.
PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS
(Atropine as prototype)
The actions of atropine can be largely predicted
from knowledge of parasympathetic responses.
Prominent effects are seen in organs which
normally receive strong parasympathetic tone.
Atropine blocks all subtypes of muscarinic
receptors.
1. CNS Atropine has an overall CNS stimu-
lant action. However, these effects are not appre-
ciable at low doses which produce only peripheral
effects because of restricted entry into the brain.
Hyoscine produces central effects (depressant)
even at low doses.
• Atropine stimulates many medullary centres
—vagal, respiratory, vasomotor.
• It depresses vestibular excitation and has
antimotion sickness property. The site of this
action is not clear—probably there is a
cholinergic link in the vestibular pathway, or
it may be exerted at the cortical level.
• By blocking the relative cholinergic over-
activity in basal ganglia, it suppresses tremor
and rigidity of parkinsonism.133
CHAPTER 9ADRENERGIC SYSTEM AND DRUGS
(ii) In adipose tissue,  triglyceride lipase is activated 
increased plasma free fatty acids. Increased O 2 consumption
and heat production result primarily by action on brown
adipose tissue, which has predominant 3 receptors.
(iii) In heart, proteins like troponin and phospholamban are
phosphorylated. The former results in increased interaction
with Ca2+ at the myofilaments  increased force of contrac-
tion; the latter causes sequestration of Ca2+ by sarcoplasmic
reticulum  more rapid relaxation. The activated protein
Gs, in addition, interacts directly with the Ca2+ channels
in the membrane promoting influx of Ca2+ which reinforces
the positive inotropic action exerted through cAMP.
(iv) In the gut and bronchial muscle , relaxation (accom-
panied with hyperpolarization) is induced, but the intermediate
steps have not been clearly delineated.
(v) In pancreatic islets activation of 2 receptors on  cells
increases glucagon secretion, and that on  cells increases
insulin secretion, both by raising intracellular cAMP. However,
augmentation of insulin secretion is weak.
 actions The mediation of  actions is varied and less
well defined.
(i) In smooth muscles (including vascular) that are contracted
through 1 receptors, the activated Gq-protein increases IP 3/
DAG production  mobilization of Ca2+ from intracellular
organelle  activation of calmodulin dependent myosin light
chain kinase  phosphorylation of myosin  contraction.
The vasoconstrictor 2 receptors probably enhance Ca2+ influx
without utilizing IP 3.
(ii) The prejunctional 2 receptor appears to inhibit neuronal
Ca2+ channels and also limit the intracellular availability of
Ca2+ by decreasing cAMP production. Transmitter (NA) release
is consequently diminished. Hyperpolarization through
activation of G-protein gated K+ channels may also occur.
(iii) In the gut, 2 receptor activation hyperpolarizes the
cholinergic neurone  decreased release of ACh  reduced
tone; whereas 1 receptors located directly on the smooth muscle
cell increase K+ efflux indirectly (by activating Ca2+ dependent
K+ channels) leading to hyperpolarization  relaxation.
(iv) In pancreatic  cells, stimulation of 2 receptors reduces
the formation of cAMP  decreased insulin release.
Administration and preparations
CAs are absorbed from the intestine but are rapidly
degraded by MAO and COMT present in the
intestinal wall and liver. They are thus orally
inactive.
1.Adrenaline (Epinephrine) For systemic
action, 0.2–0.5 mg s.c., i.m., action lasts ½ to
2 hrs. ADRENALINE 1 mg/ml inj; ADRENA 4 mg (of
Adr. bitartrate=2mg Adr. base)/2 ml inj.
As local vasoconstrictor, 1 in 200,000 to 1
in 100,000 added to lidocaine;
in XYLOCAINE with ADRENALINE: lidocaine 21.3
mg + adrenaline 0.005 mg/ml inj; 30 ml vial.2.Noradrenaline (Norepinephrine, levarterenol)
2–4 µg/min i.v. infusion; local tissue necrosis
occurs if the solution extravasates; do not mix
with NaHCO 3 in the same bottle (rapid oxidation
occurs); action starts declining within 5 min of
discontinuing infusion. It is rarely used now as
a pressor agent. ADRENOR, NORAD, VASCUE, NOR-
DRIN 2 mg (base)/2 ml amp.
3.Isoprenaline (Isoproterenol) 20 mg sublin-
gual, 1–2 mg i.m., 5–10 µg/min i.v. infusion;
action lasts 1–3 hrs. It is occasionally used to
maintain idioventricular rate till pacemaker is
implanted. For bronchial asthma, it has been
superseded by selective 2 agonists.
ISOPRIN, ISOSOL 4 mg/2 ml inj, NEOEPININE 20 mg
sublingual tablets.
Adverse effects and contraindications
• Transient restlessness, headache,  palpitation,
anxiety, tremor and pallor may occur after s.c./
i.m. injection of Adr.
• Marked rise in BP leading to cerebral haemor-
rhage, ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation,
angina, myocardial infarction are the hazards of
large doses or inadvertant i.v. injection of Adr.
• Adr is contraindicated in hypertensive, hyper-
thyroid and angina patients.
• Adr should not be given during anaesthesia
with halothane (risk of arrhythmias) and to
patients receiving  blockers (marked rise in
BP can occur due to unopposed  action).
THERAPEUTIC CLASSIFICATION OF
ADRENERGIC DRUGS
I.Pressor agents
Noradrenaline Phenylephrine
Ephedrine Methoxamine
Dopamine Mephentermine
II.Cardiac stimulants
Adrenaline Dobutamine
Isoprenaline
III.Bronchodilators
Isoprenaline Salmeterol
Salbutamol Formoterol
(Albuterol) Bambuterol
Terbutaline134
SECTION 2DRUGS ACTING ON ANS
IV.Nasal decongestants
Phenylephrine Naphazoline
Xylometazoline Pseudoephedrine
Oxymetazoline Phenyl propanolamine
V.CNS stimulants
Amphetamine Methamphetamine
Dexamphetamine
VI.Anorectics
Fenfluramine Sibutramine
Dexfenfluramine
VII.Uterine relaxant and vasodilators
Ritodrine Salbutamol
Isoxsuprine Terbutaline
Salient features of important adrenergic drugs are
described below.
Dopamine (DA)It is a dopaminergic (D1 and
D2) as well as  adrenergic  and 1 (but not 2) 
agonist. The D1 receptors in renal and mesenteric
blood vessels are the most sensitive: i.v. infusion
of low dose of DA dilates these vessels (by raising
intracellular cAMP). This increases g.f.r. In
addition DA exerts natriuretic effect by D1
receptors on proximal tubular cells. Moderately
high doses produce a positive inotropic (direct 1
and D1 action + that due to NA release), but little
chronotropic effect on heart. Vasoconstriction ( 1
action) occurs only when large doses are infused.
At doses normally employed, it raises cardiac
output and systolic BP with little effect on diastolic
BP. It has practically no effect on nonvascular 
and  receptors; does not penetrate blood-brain
barrier—no CNS effects.
Dopamine is used in patients of cardiogenic
or septic shock and severe CHF wherein it increa-
ses BP and urine outflow. It is administered by
i.v. infusion (0.2–1 mg/min) which is regulated
by monitoring BP and rate of urine formation.
DOPAMINE, INTROPIN, DOPACARD 200 mg in 5 ml amp.
Dobutamine A derivative of DA, but not a
D1 or D2 receptor agonist. Though it acts on both
 and  adrenergic receptors, the only prominent
action of clinically employed doses (2–8 µg/kg/
min i.v. infusion) is increased force of cardiaccontraction and output, without significant change
in heart rate, peripheral resistance and BP. As
such, it is considered to be a relatively selective
1 agonist. It is used as an inotropic agent in
pump failure accompanying myocardial infarction,
cardiac surgery, and for short term management
of severe congestive heart failure. It is less
arrhythmogenic than Adr.
CRDIJECT 50 mg/4 ml and 250 mg per 20 ml amp,
DOBUTREX, DOBUSTAT 250 mg vial.
Ephedrine It is an alkaloid obtained from
Ephedra vulgaris.  Mainly acts indirectly but has
some direct action as well on  and  receptors.
Repeated injections produce tachyphylaxis,
primarily because the neuronal pool of NA
available for displacement is small. It is resistant
to MAO, therefore, effective orally. It is about
100 times less potent than Adr, but longer acting
(4–6 hours). Ephedrine crosses to brain and causes
stimulation, but central: peripheral activity ratio
is lower than that of amphetamine.
Ephedrine can be used for a variety of
purposes, but it lacks selectivity, and efficacy is
low. Use is now restricted to that in mild chronic
bronchial asthma and for hypotension during
spinal anaesthesia; occasionally for postural
hypotension; 15–60 mg TDS.
EPHEDRINE HCl 15, 30 mg tab; SULFIDRIN 50 mg in
1 ml inj, in ENDRINE 0.75% nasal drops.
Amphetamines These are synthetic compounds
having a pharmacological profile similar to
ephedrine; orally active with relatively long
duration (4–6 hours). They exert potent CNS
stimulant and weaker peripheral cardiovascular
actions. Maximal selectivity is exhibited by
dextroamphetamine and methamphetamine, which
in the usual doses produce few peripheral effects.
The central actions of amphetamines are
largely mediated by release of NA from adrenergic
neurones in the brain. This occurs mainly by
exchange diffusion  and reverse transport involving
transporters like NET, DAT and VMAT2 as
depicted in Fig. 9.5. However, the effects on
locomotor activity, perception and the psychotic
phenomena seen at high doses are probably dueThese are drugs which antagonize the receptor
action of adrenaline and related drugs. They are
competitive antagonists at  or  or both  and
 adrenergic receptors and differ in important
ways from the “adrenergic neurone blocking
agents”, which act by interfering with the release
of adrenergic transmitter on nerve stimulation.
These differences are given in Table 10.1.
 ADRENERGIC BLOCKING DRUGS
These drugs inhibit adrenergic responses media-
ted through the  adrenergic receptors without
affecting those mediated through  receptors.
CLASSIFICATION
I.Nonequilibrium type
(i)-Haloalkylamines —Phenoxybenzamine.
II.Equilibrium type (competitive)
A. Nonselective
(i)Ergot alkaloids —Ergotamine, Ergotoxine
(ii)Hydrogenated ergot alkaloids —Dihydro-
ergotamine (DHE), Dihydroergotoxine
(iii)Imidazoline —Phentolamine
(iv)Miscellaneous– Chlorpromazine
B.1 selective— Prazosin, Terazosin,
 Doxazosin, Alfuzosin,
 Tamsulosin
C.2 selective— Yohimbine
GENERAL EFFECTS OF  BLOCKERS
1. Blockade of vasoconstrictor 1 (also 2) recep-
tors reduces peripheral resistance and causes
pooling of blood in capacitance vessels  venous
return and cardiac output are reduced  fall in
BP. Postural reflex is interfered with  marked
hypotension  occurs on standing  dizziness andsyncope. Hypovolemia accentuates the hypoten-
sion. The  blockers abolish the pressor action of
Adr (injected i.v. in animals), which then produces
only fall in BP due to  mediated vasodilatation.
This was first demonstrated by Sir HH Dale (1913)
and is called vasomotor reversal of Dale . Pressor
and other actions of selective  agonists (phenyl-
ephrine) are suppressed.
2. Reflex tachycardia  occurs due to fall in mean
arterial pressure and increased release of NA due
to blockade of presynaptic 2 receptors.
3.Nasal stuffiness  and miosis result from
blockade of  receptors in nasal blood vessels
and in radial muscles of iris respectively.
4. Intestinal motility is increased due to partial
inhibition of relaxant sympathetic influences—
loose motion may occur.
5. Hypotension produced by  blockers can
reduce renal blood flow  g.f.r. is reduced
and more complete reabsorption of Na+ and water
occurs in the tubules  Na+ retention  and
expansion of blood volume . This is accentuated
by reflex  increase in renin release mediated
through 1 receptors.
6. Tone of smooth muscle in bladder trigone,
sphincter and prostate is reduced by blockade
of  1 receptors (mostly of the  1A subtype)
 urine  flow in patients with  benign hypertrophy
of prostate (BHP) is improved .
7. Contractions of vas deferens and related
organs which result in ejaculation are coordina-
ted through  receptors—  blockers can inhibit
ejaculation ; this may manifest as impotence .
The  blockers have no effect on adrenergic
cardiac stimulation, bronchodilatation, vaso-
dilatation and most of the metabolic changes,
because these are mediated predominantly through
 receptors.Antiadrenergic Drugs
(Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists)
and Drugs for GlaucomaChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 1010101010144
SECTION 2DRUGS ACTING ON ANS
However, effects last only till the drug is given.
Even with continued therapy, benefit may decline
after few years due to disease progression. They
may be used concurrently with finasteride.
Terazosin, doxazosin, alfuzosin and tamsulosin
are the peferred 1 blockers because of once daily
dosing. There is some evidence that terazosin and
doxazosin promote apoptosis in prostate.
Tamsulosin appears to cause fewer vascular side
effects because of relative  1A /1D selectivity.
4.Secondary shock Shock due to blood or fluid loss
is accompanied by reflex vasoconstriction. If volume replace-
ment fails to reverse this (extremities remain pale and cold,
pulse pressure does not improve), therapy with an  blocker
(phenoxybenzamine i.v.) can help by:
(i) Counteracting vasoconstriction.
(ii) Shifting blood from pulmonary to systemic circuit.
(iii) Returning fluid from extravascular to the vascular
compartment so that cardiac output improves.
5.Peripheral vascular diseases  blockers do increase
skin and to some extent muscle blood flow in normal individuals,
but these drugs are largely disappointing in peripheral vascular
diseases when obstruction is organic (Buerger’s disease).
However, when vasoconstriction is a prominent feature
(Raynaud’s phenomenon, acrocyanosis), good symptomatic
relief is afforded by prazosin or phenoxybenzamine.
6.Congestive heart failure (CHF) The vasodilator
action of prazosin can afford symptomatic relief in selected
patients of CHF in the short-term, but long-term prognosis
is not improved.
7.Papaverine/Phentolamine Induced Penile Erection
(PIPE) therapy for impotence In patients unable to achieve
erection, injection of papaverine (3–20 mg) with or without
phentolamine (0.5–1 mg) in the corpus cavernosum has been
found to produce penile tumescence to permit intercourse.
However, the procedure requires skill and training. Priapism
occurs in 2–15% cases, which if not promptly treated leads
to permanent damage. This is reversed by aspirating blood
from the corpus cavernosum or by injecting phenylephrine
locally. Repeated injections can cause penile fibrosis. Other
complications are—local haematoma, infection, paresthesia
and penile deviation. This therapy should therefore be reserved
for selected situations with proper facilities. ADRENERGIC BLOCKING DRUGS
These drugs inhibit adrenergic responses media-
ted through the  receptors.
The dichloro derivative of isoprenaline was the first com-
pound found in 1958 to block adrenergic responses which
could not be blocked till then by the available adrenergic
antagonists. However, it was not suitable for clinical use.
Propranolol  introduced in 1963 was a therapeutic break-
through. Since then, drugs in this class have proliferated
and diversified.
All  blockers are competitive antagonists.
Propranolol blocks 1 and 2 receptors, but has
weak activity on 3 subtype. It is also an inverse
agonist: reduces resting heart rate as well. Some
 blockers like metoprolol, atenolol, etc.
preferentially block 1 receptors, while few others
have additional 1 receptor blocking and/or
vasodilator properties.
CLASSIFICATION
Nonselective ( 1 and 2)
a.Without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity
Propranolol, Sotalol, Timolol.
b.With intrinsic sympathomimetic activity
Pindolol
c.With additional   blocking property
Labetalol, Carvedilol
Cardioselective (1)
Metoprolol, Atenolol, Acebutolol, Bisoprolol,
Esmolol, Betaxolol, Celiprolol, Nebivolol
The pharmacology of propranolol is described
as prototype.
Another system classifies  blockers into 3 generations.
First generation Second generation Third generation
(older, nonselective) ( 1 selective) (with additional  blocking
and/or vasodilator property)
Propranolol Metoprolol Labetalol
Timolol Atenolol Carvedilol
Sotalol Acebutolol Celiprolol
Pindolol Bisoprolol Nebivolol
Esmolol Betaxolol
164
SECTION 3AUTACOIDS AND RELATED DRUGS
TABLE 11.2 Clinical classification, doses and preparations of H1 antihistaminics
Drug Dose and route Preparations
I.HIGHLY SEDATIVE
Diphenhydramine 25–50 mg oral BENADRYL 25, 50 mg cap., 12.5 mg/5ml syr.
Dimenhydrinate 25–50 mg oral, DRAMAMINE 16 mg/5 ml syr, 50 mg tab
Promethazine 25–50 mg oral, PHENERGAN 10, 25 mg tab., 5 mg/ml elixer,
i.m. (1 mg/kg) 25 mg/ml inj
Hydroxyzine 25–50 mg oral, ATARAX 10, 25 mg tab., 10 mg/5 ml syr, 6 mg/ml
i.m. drops, 25 mg/ml inj.
II.MODERATELY SEDATIVE
Pheniramine 20–50 mg oral, AVIL 25 mg, 50 mg tab, 15 mg/5 ml syr,
i.m. 22.5 mg/ml inj.
Cyproheptadine 4 mg oral PRACTIN, CIPLACTIN 4 mg tab., 2 mg/5ml syrup,
Meclozine (Meclizine) 25–50 mg oral In DILIGAN 12.5 mg + niacin 50 mg tab
In PREGNIDOXIN 25 mg + Caffeine 20 mg tab
Cinnarizine 25–50 mg oral STUGERON, VERTIGON 25 and 75 mg tab.
III.MILD SEDATIVE
Chlorpheniramine 2–4 mg (0.1 mg/kg) PIRITON, CADISTIN 4 mg tab,
oral, i.m.
Dexchlorpheniramine 2 mg oral POLARAMINE 2 mg tab, 0.5 mg/ 5 ml syr
Triprolidine 2.5–5 mg oral ACTIDIL 2.5 mg tab., ACTIFED 2.5 mg with
pseudoephedrine 60 mg tab.
Clemastine 1–2 mg oral TAVEGYL  1 mg tab., 0.5 mg/5 ml syr
IV.SECOND GENERATION ANTIHISTAMINICS
Fexofenadine 120–180 mg oral ALLEGRA, ALTIVA, FEXO 120, 180 mg tab
Loratadine 10 mg oral LORFAST, LORIDIN, LORMEG, 10 mg tab,
1 mg/ml susp.
Desloratadine 5 mg oral DESLOR, LORDAY, NEOLORIDIN 5 mg tab
Cetirizine 10 mg oral ALERID, CETZINE, ZIRTIN, SIZON 10 mg tab,
5 mg/5 ml syr.
Levocetirizine 5–10 mg oral LEVOSIZ, LEVORID, TECZINE 5, 10 mg tab
LEVOCET 5 mg tab, 2.5mg/5 ml syr.
Azelastine 4 mg oral AZEP NASAL SPRAY 0.14 mg
0.28 mg intranasal per puff nasal spray
Mizolastine 10 mg oral ELINA 10 mg tab
Ebastine 10 mg oral EBAST 10 mg tab
Rupatadine 10 mg oral RUPAHIST 10 mg tab
Terfenadine and astemizole are the earliest second generation H1 antihistamines that are now banned. Cyclizine,
buclizine, dimethindine, mebhydroline are conventional antihistamines that have become unavailable.Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory
Drugs and Antipyretic-AnalgesicsChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 1414141414
All drugs grouped in this class have analgesic,
antipyretic and antiinflammatory actions in
different measures. In contrast to morphine they
do not depress CNS, do not produce physical
dependence, have no abuse liability and are weaker
analgesics (except for inflammatory pain). They
are also called nonnarcotic, nonopioid  or aspirin-
like analgesics. They act primarily on peripheral
pain mechanisms, but also in the CNS to raise
pain threshold. They are more commonly
employed and many are over-the-counter drugs.
Willow bark ( Salix alba ) had been used for many
centuries. Salicylic acid was prepared by hydrolysis of the
bitter glycoside obtained from this plant. Sodium salicylate
was used for fever and pain in 1875; its great success led
to the introduction of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) in 1899.
Phenacetin  and antipyrine  were also produced at that time.
The next major advance was the development of
phenylbutazone in 1949 having antiinflammatory activity
almost comparable to corticosteroids. The term Nonsteroidal
Antiinflammatory Drug (NSAID) was coined to designate
such drugs. Indomethacin  was introduced in 1963. A host
of compounds heralded by the propionic acid derivative
ibuprofen have been added since then and cyclooxygenase
(COX) inhibition is recognised to be their most important
mechanism of action. Subsequently some selective COX-2
inhibitors (celecoxib, etc.) have been added.
The antipyretic-analgesics are chemically
diverse, but most are organic acids.
CLASSIFICATION
A.Nonselective COX inhibitors (traditional
NSAIDs)
1.Salicylates :  Aspirin.
2.Propionic acid derivatives : Ibuprofen,
Naproxen, Ketoprofen, Flurbiprofen.
3.Fenamate : Mephenamic acid.
4.Enolic acid derivatives :  Piroxicam,
Tenoxicam.
5.Acetic acid derivatives : Ketorolac,
Indomethacin, Nabumetone.6.Pyrazolone derivatives : Phenylbutazone,
Oxyphenbutazone.
B.Preferential COX-2 inhibitors
Nimesulide, Diclofenac, Aceclofenac,
Meloxicam, Etodolac.
C. Selective COX-2 inhibitors
Celecoxib, Etoricoxib, Parecoxib.
D.Analgesic-antipyretics with poor
antiinflammatory action
1.Paraaminophenol derivative : Paracetamol
(Acetaminophen).
2.Pyrazolone derivatives : Metamizol (Dipy-
rone), Propiphenazone.
3.Benzoxazocine derivative :  Nefopam.
NSAIDs and prostaglandin (PG)
synthesis inhibition
In 1971 Vane and coworkers made the landmark
observation that aspirin and some NSAIDs
blocked PG generation. This is now considered
to be the major mechanism of action of NSAIDs.
Prostaglandins, prostacyclin (PG I 2) and throm-
boxane A 2 (TXA 2) are produced from arachidonic
acid by the enzyme cyclooxygenase ( see p. 182)
which exists in a constitutive (COX-1) and an
inducible (COX-2) isoforms; the former serves
physiological ‘house keeping’ functions, while the
latter, normally present in minute quantities, is
induced by cytokines and other signal molecules
at the site of inflammation  generation of PGs
locally which mediate many of the inflammatory
changes. However, COX-2 is constitutively present
at some sites in brain, in juxtaglomerular cells
and in the foetus; it may serve physiological role
at these sites. Most NSAIDs inhibit COX-1 and
COX-2 nonselectively, but now some selective
COX-2 inhibitors have been produced. FeaturesAntirheumatoid and
Antigout DrugsChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 1515151515
ANTIRHEUMATOID DRUGS
These are drugs which (except corticosteroids),
can suppress the rheumatoid process, bring about
a remission and retard disease progression, but
do not have nonspecific antiinflammatory or
analgesic action. They are used in rheumatoid
arthritis (RA) in addition to NSAIDs and are also
referred to as disease modifying antirheumatic
drugs (DMARDs) or slow acting antirheumatic
drugs (SAARDs). The onset of benefit with
DMARDs takes a few months of regular treatment
and relapses occur a few months after cessation
of therapy. Recently, some biological agents
(antibodies and other proteins) have been added
for resistant cases.
Rheumatoid arthritis  (RA) is an autoimmune
disease in which there is joint inflammation,
synovial proliferation and destruction of articular
cartilage. Immune complexes composed of IgM
activate complement and release cytokines
(mainly TNF  and IL-1) which are chemotactic
for neutrophils. These inflammatory cells secrete
lysosomal enzymes which damage cartilage and
erode bone, while PGs produced in the process
cause vasodilatation and pain. RA is a chronic
progressive, crippling disorder with a waxing and
waning course. NSAIDs are the first line drugs
and afford symptomatic relief in pain,
swelling, morning stiffness, immobility, but do
not arrest the disease process.
The goals of drug therapy in RA are:
• Ameliorate pain, swelling and joint stiffness
• Prevent articular cartilage damage and bony
erosions
• Prevent deformity and preserve joint function.
Though mild/early cases are still mostly treated
with NSAIDs only, the current recommendation
is to add DMARDs as soon as the diagnosis of
RA is confirmed. However, use of DMARDs inearly/mild RA should be weighed against their
potential adverse effects, which may be serious.
More than one DMARD may be used con-
currently; advanced cases may require 2 or 3 drugs
together, because all DMARDs tend to lose
effectiveness with time.
CLASSIFICATION
I.Disease modifying antirheumatic drugs
(DMARDs)
A. Nonbiological drugs
1.Immunosuppressants: Methotrexate,
Azathioprine, Cyclosporine
2. Sulfasalazine
3. Chloroquine or Hydroxychloroquine
4. Leflunomide
B.Biological agents
1.TNF inhibitors: Etanercept, Infliximab,
Adalimumab
2.IL-1 antagonist: Anakinra
II.Adjuvant drugs
Corticosteroids: Prednisolone and others
(Gold and penicillamine are obsolete DMARDs.)
Nonbiological drugs
1. Immunosuppressants (see Ch. 63)
Methotrexate (Mtx) This dihydrofolate reductase
inhibitor has prominent immunosuppressant and
antiinflammatory property. Beneficial effects in
RA are probably related to inhibition of cytokine
production, chemotaxis and cell-mediated immune
reaction. Induction of oral low-dose (7.5–15 mg)
weekly Mtx regimen has improved acceptability
of this drug in RA. Onset of symptom relief is
relatively rapid (4–6 weeks), therefore preferred222
SECTION 4RESPIRATORY SYSTEM DRUGS
• Release of phospholipids from cell membrane
followed by mediator synthesis (within
minutes):  PGs, LTs, PAF.
• Activation of genes followed by protein
synthesis (over hours): Interleukins, TNF
These mediators together constrict bronchial
smooth muscle, cause mucosal edema, hyperemia
and produce viscid secretions, all resulting in
reversible airway obstruction. The inflammation
perpetuates itself by cell-to-cell communication
and recruitment of more and more inflammatory
cells. Bronchial smooth muscle hypertrophy,
increase in the population of mucus secreting cells
and blood vessels  occurs over time and damage
to bronchial epithelium accentuates the hyper-
reactivity. Vagal discharge to bronchial muscle
is enhanced reflexly. Airway remodeling
progressively worsens the disease.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)  is also
an inflammatory disease of the lungs characterized by
progressive emphysema (alveolar destruction) and bronchiolar
fibrosis in variable proportions. Loss of bronchiolar elasticity
leads to closure of smaller air tubes during expiration. The
airway obstruction is accentuated during exercise causing
shortness of breath. The expiratory airflow limitation does
not fluctuate markedly over long periods of time, but there
are exacerbations precipitated by respiratory infections,
pollutants, etc. It is clearly related to smoking and charac-
teristically starts after the age of 40. Quiting smoking reduces
the rate of decline in lung function. Bronchodilators prevent
closure of peripheral air tubes during expiration and afford
symptomatic relief in COPD patients, but improvement in
forced expiratory volume in 1st second (FEV 1) following
inhalation of a shortacting 2 agonist is generally <15%.
An increasing part of airway obstruction is irreversible.
APPROACHES TO TREATMENT
1.Prevention of AG:AB reaction —avoidance
of antigen, hyposensitization—possible in ext-
rinsic asthma and if antigen can be identified.
2.Neutralization of IgE (reaginic antibody) —
Omalizumab.
3.Suppression of inflammation and bronchial
hyperreactivity —corticosteroids.
4.Prevention of release of mediators —mast
cell stabilizers.
5.Antagonism of released mediators —leuko-
triene antagonists, antihistamines, PAF
antagonists.6.Blockade of constrictor neurotransmitter —
anticholinergics.
7.Mimicking dilator neurotransmitter —sympa-
thomimetics.
8.Directly acting bronchodilators —methylxan-
thines.
CLASSIFICATION
I.Bronchodilators
A.2 Sympathomimetics:  Salbutamol, Terbutaline,
Bambuterol, Salmeterol, Formoterol,
Ephedrine.
B.Methylxanthines: Theophylline (anhydrous),
Aminophylline, Choline theophyllinate,
Hydroxyethyl theophylline, Theophylline
ethanolate of piperazine, Doxophylline.
C.Anticholinergics:  Ipratropium bromide,
Tiotropium bromide.
II.Leukotriene antagonists
Montelukast, Zafirlukast.
III.Mast cell stabilizers
Sodium cromoglycate, Ketotifen.
IV.Corticosteroids
A.Systemic:  Hydrocortisone, Prednisolone and
others.
B.Inhalational:  Beclomethasone dipropionate,
Budesonide, Fluticasone propionate, Fluniso-
lide, Ciclesonide.
V.Anti-IgE antibody
Omalizumab
SYMPATHOMIMETICS (see Ch. 9)
Adrenergic drugs cause bronchodilatation through
2 receptor stimulation  increased cAMP forma-
tion in bronchial muscle cell  relaxation. In
addition, increased cAMP in mast cells and other
inflammatory cells decreases mediator release.
Since 2 receptors on inflammatory cells
desensitize quickly, the contribution of this action
to the beneficial effect of 2 agonists in asthma
where airway inflammmation is chronic, is
uncertain, and at best minimal. Adrenergic drugs
are the mainstay of treatment of reversible airway252
SECTION 5HORMONES AND RELATED DRUGS
T4 therapy. Nonfunctional nodules and those non-
responsive to TSH (that are associated with low
TSH levels) do not respond and should not be
treated with levothyroxine. T4 therapy should be
stopped if the nodule does not decrease in size
within 6 months, and when it stops regressing
after the initial response.
6. Papillary carcinoma of thyroid This
type of cancer is often responsive to TSH. In
nonresectable cases, full doses of T4 suppress
endogenous TSH production and may induce
temporary regression.
7. Empirical uses T4 has been sometimes used in the
following conditions without any rationale; response is
unpredictable.
Refractory anaemias.
Mental depression
Menstrual disorders, infertility not corrected by usual
treatment.
Chronic/non-healing ulcers.
Obstinate constipation.
Thyroxine is not to be used for obesity and as a hypo-
cholesterolemic agent.
THYROID INHIBITORS
These are drugs used to lower the functional
capacity of the hyperactive thyroid gland.
Thyrotoxicosis is due to excessive secretion
of thyroid hormones. The two main causes are
Graves’ disease  and toxic nodular goiter . Graves’
disease is an autoimmune disorder: IgG class of
antibodies to the TSH receptor are detected in
blood. They bind to and stimulate thyroid cells,
and produce other TSH like effects. Due to feed-
back inhibition, TSH levels are low. The accom-
panying exophthalmos is due to autoimmune
inflammation of periorbital tissues.
Toxic nodular goiter, which produces thyroid
hormone independent of TSH, mostly supervenes
on old nontoxic goiters. It is more common in
the elderly; ocular changes are generally absent.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Inhibit hormone synthesis (Antithyroid
drugs)
Propylthiouracil, Methimazole,  Carbimazole.2.Inhibit iodide trapping (Ionic inhibitors)
Thiocyanates (–SCN), Perchlorates (–ClO4),
Nitrates (–NO3).
3.Inhibit hormone release
Iodine, Iodides of Na and K, Organic iodide.
4.Destroy thyroid tissue
Radioactive iodine (131I, 125I, 123I).
Compounds in groups 1 and 2 may be collec-
tively called goitrogens  because, if given in excess,
they cause enlargement of thyroid by feedback
release of TSH.
In addition, certain drugs used in high doses for prolonged
periods cause hypothyroidism/goiter as a side effect:
• Lithium: inhibits thyroid hormone release.
• Amiodarone: inhibits peripheral conversion of T 4 to T3;
also interferes with thyroid hormone action.
• Sulfonamides, paraaminosalicylic acid: inhibit thyro-
globulin iodination and coupling reaction.
• Phenobarbitone, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin:
induce metabolic degradation of T 4/T3.
Goitrin—found in plants (cabbage, turnip, mustard, etc.),
is the cause of goiter in cattle who feed on these plants.
May contribute to endemic goiter in certain iodine deficient
regions.
ANTITHYROID DRUGS (Thioamides)
By convention, only the hormone synthesis
inhibitors are called antithyroid drugs, though
this term has also been applied to all thyroid
inhibitors.
Thiourea derivatives were found to produce goiter
and hypothyroidism in rats in the 1940s. Open chain
compounds were found to be toxic. Subsequently, methyl
and propyl thiouracil and thioimidazole derivatives
methimazole and carbimazole were found to be safe and
effective.
Antithyroid drugs bind to the thyroid
peroxidase and prevent oxidation of iodide/
iodotyrosyl residues, thereby;
(i) Inhibit iodination of tyrosine residues in
thyroglobulin
(ii) Inhibit coupling of iodotyrosine residues to
form T 3 and T 4.
Action (ii) has been observed at lower
concentration of antithyroid drugs than action (i).
Thyroid colloid is depleted over time and blood
levels of T 3/T4 are progressively lowered.270
SECTION 5HORMONES AND RELATED DRUGS
fine powder delivered through a nebulizer controlled meal-
time glycaemia, but was not suitable for round-the-clock
basal effect. Attempts are being made to overcome the
shortcomings.
4.Insulin pumps Portable infusion devices connected
to a subcutaneously placed cannula—provide ‘continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion’ (CSII). Only regular insulin
or a fast acting insulin analogue is used. The pump can
be programmed to deliver insulin at a low basal rate (approx.
1 U/hr) and premeal boluses (4–15 times the basal rate)
to control post-prandial glycaemia. Though, theoretically more
appealing, no definite advantage of CSII over multidose s.c.
injection has been demonstrated. Moreover, cost, strict
adherence to diet, exercise, care of the device and cannula,
risk of pump failure, site infection, are too demanding on
the patient. The CSII may be appropriate for selected type
2 DM cases only.
5.Implantable pumps Consist of an electromechanical
mechanism which regulates insulin delivery from a percu-
taneously refillable reservoir. Mechanical pumps, propellant
driven and osmotic pumps have been utilized.
6.Other routes of insulin delivery Intraperitoneal, oral
(by complexing insulin into liposomes or coating it with
impermeable polymer) and rectal routes are being tried. These
have the advantage of providing higher concentrations in
the portal circulation, which is more physiological.
ORAL HYPOGLYCAEMIC DRUGS
These drugs lower blood glucose levels and are
effective orally. The chief draw back of insulin
is—it must be given by injection. Orally active
drugs have always been saught.
The early sulfonamides tested in 1940s produced hypo-
glycaemia as side effect. Taking this lead, the first clinically
acceptable sulfonylurea tolbutamide  was introduced in 1957.
Others followed soon after. In the 1970s many so called
‘second generation’ sulfonylureas were developed which are
20–100 times more potent. Clinically useful biguanide
phenformin  was produced parallel to sulfonylureas in 1957.
Newer approaches have constantly been explored and
have lately yielded thiazolidinediones , meglitinide analogues ,
-glucosidase inhibitors  and the latest are dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors .
CLASSIFICATION
A.Enhance Insulin secretion
1.Sulfonylureas (K ATP Channel blockers)
First generation: Tolbutamide
Second generation: Glibenclamide (Glyburide),
Glipizide, Gliclazide, Glimepiride2.Meglitinide/phenylalanine analogues
Repaglinide, Nateglinide
3.Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor
agonists (Injectable drugs)
Exenatide, Liraglutide
4.Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors
Sitagliptin, Vildagliptin, Saxagliptin, Alogliptin,
Linagliptin
B.Overcome Insulin resistance
1.Biguanide (AMP K activator)
Metformin
2.Thiazolidinediones (PPAR  activator)
Pioglitazone
C.Miscellaneous antidiabetic drugs
1.-Glucosidase inhibitors
Acarbose, Miglitol, Voglibose
2.Amylin analogue
Pramlintide
3.Dopamine-D2 receptor agonist
Bromocriptin
4.Sodium-glucose cotransport-2 (SGLT-2)
inhibitor
Dapagliflozin
Sulfonylureas (KATP Channel blockers)
The generic formula of sulfonylureas (SUs) is—
All SUs have similar pharmacological profile, their
sole significant action being lowering of blood
glucose level in normal subjects and in type 2
diabetics, but not in type 1 diabetics. Being more
potent and clinically superior, only the second
generation SUs are employed now. All first
generation compounds have been discontinued
except tolbutamide which is infrequently used.
Mechanism of action Sulfonylureas provoke
a brisk release of insulin from pancreas, the
mechanism of which is detailed in Fig. 19.6. The
rate of insulin secretion at any glucose concen-
tration is increased, i.e. insulin release is provoked
even at low-glucose concentration risking
production of severe and unpredictable hypo-
glycaemia. In type 2 DM the kinetics of insulin
release in response to glucose or meals is delayed
357
CHAPTER 25SKELETAL MUSCLE RELAXANTS
on neuromuscular transmission and on muscle
fibres, but reduce decerebrate rigidity, upper
motor neurone spasticity and hyperreflexia.
The prominent differences between peri-
pherally and centrally acting muscle relaxants
are listed in Table 25.3.
CLASSIFICATION
(i)Mephenesin Mephenesin,
congeners Carisoprodol,
Chlorzoxazone,
Chlormeza none,
Methocarbamol.
(ii)Benzodiazepines Diazepam and others.
(iii)GABA mimetic Baclofen,
Thiocolchicoside
(iv)Central 2 agonist Tizanidine
1. Mephenesin It was the first drug found to cause muscle
relaxation in animals without producing unconsciousness and
was called internuncial neurone blocking agent  because its
primary site of action is the spinal internuncial neurone which
modulates reflexes maintaining muscle tone. It is not used
clinically because orally it causes marked gastric irritation,
and injected i.v., it causes thrombophlebitis, haemolysis and
fall in BP. It has been included in counterirritant ointments
(MEDICREME, RELAXYL)  where its irritant rather than muscle
relaxant property could be affording relief.
2. Carisoprodol It has a favourable muscle
relaxant: sedative activity ratio with weak anal-
gesic, antipyretic and anticholinergic properties.
It is used in musculoskeletal disorders associated
with muscle spasm.
CARISOMA 350 mg tab; one tab. TDS-QID, SOMAFLAM
175 mg + ibuprofen 400 mg tab.3. Chlorzoxazone It is pharmacologically
similar to mephenesin, but has a longer duration
of action and is better tolerated orally.
FLEXON-MR 250 mg + ibuprofen 400 mg + paracetamol
325 mg tab; ULTRAZOX  250 mg + diclofenac 50 mg +
paracetamol 325 mg tab; MOBIZOX 500 mg + diclofenac
50 mg + paracetamol 500 mg tab; PARAFON: 250 mg +
paracetamol 300 mg tab, 1–2 tab TDS.
4. Chlormezanone It has antianxiety and
hypnotic actions as well, and has been used for
tension states associated with increased muscle
tone.
DOLOBAK 100 mg + paracetamol 450 mg tab, 1–2 tab TDS.
5. Methocarbamol It is less sedative and
longer acting than mephenesin. Orally it has been
used in reflex muscle spasms and chronic neuro-
logical diseases. It can be injected i.v. without
producing thrombophlebitis and haemolysis—
used for orthopedic procedures and tetanus.
ROBINAX 0.5 g tab, 1 TDS: 100 mg/ml inj. for i.v. or i.m.
use. ROBIFLAM 750 mg + ibuprofen 200 mg tab; NEUROMOL-
MR 400 mg + paracetamol 500 mg tab.
Clinical efficacy of none of the above drugs
as muscle relaxant is well established. Gastric
irritation and sedation are the most important
side effects.
6. Diazepam (see Ch. 29) It is the prototype
of benzodiazepines (BZDs) which act in the brain
on specific receptors enhancing GABAergic
transmission. Muscle tone is reduced by supra-
spinal rather than spinal action; muscle relaxant:
sedative activity ratio is low. No gastric irritation
occurs and it is very well tolerated, thoughTABLE 25.3 Comparative features of centrally and peripherally acting muscle relaxants
Centrally acting Peripherally acting
1. Decrease muscle tone without reducing Cause muscle paralysis, voluntary movements
voluntary power lost
2. Selectively inhibit polysynaptic reflexes in CNS Block neuromuscular transmission
3. Cause some CNS depression No effect on CNS
4. Given orally, sometimes parenterally Practically always given i.v.
5. Used in chronic spastic conditions, Used for short-term purposes
acute muscle spasms, tetanus (surgical operations)Local Anaesthetics ChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 2626262626
Local anaesthetics (LAs) are drugs which upon
topical application or local injection cause rever-
sible loss of sensory perception, especially of
pain, in a restricted area of the body. They block
generation and conduction of nerve impulse at
any part of the neurone with which they come in
contact, without causing any structural damage.
Thus, not only sensory but also motor impulses
are interrupted when a LA is applied to a mixed
nerve, resulting in muscular paralysis and loss
of autonomic control as well.
Important differences between general and
local anaesthesia are tabulated in Table 26.1.
CLASSIFICATION
Injectable anaesthetic
Low potency, short duration
Procaine
Chloroprocaine
Intermediate potency and duration
Lidocaine (Lignocaine)
PrilocaineHigh potency, long duration
Tetracaine (Amethocaine)
Bupivacaine
Ropivacaine
Dibucaine (Cinchocaine)
Surface anaesthetic
Soluble Insoluble
Cocaine Benzocaine
Lidocaine Butylaminobenzoate
Tetracaine (Butamben)
Benoxinate Oxethazaine
Mepivacaine, Etidocaine, Articaine, Dyclonine, Proparacaine
are other local anaesthetics, occasionally used in some
countries.
Some other drugs, e.g. propranolol, chlorpromazine, H 1
antihistaminics, quinine have significant LA activity, but are
not used for this purpose because of local irritancy or other
prominent systemic activity. Local anaesthesia can be
produced by cooling as well, e.g. application of ice, CO 2
snow, ethylchloride spray.
CHEMISTRY
The clinically useful LAs are weak bases with
amphiphilic property. A hydrophilic secondary
TABLE 26.1 Comparative features of general and local anaesthesia
General Local
anaesthesia anaesthesia
 1. Site of action CNS Peripheral nerves
 2. Area of body involved Whole body Restricted area
 3. Consciousness Lost Unaltered
 4. Care of vital functions Essential Usually not needed
 5. Physiological trespass High Low
 6. Poor health patient Risky Safer
 7. Use in non-cooperative patient Possible Not possible
 8. Major surgery Preferred Cannot be used
 9. Minor surgery Not preferred Preferred377
CHAPTER 27GENERAL ANAESTHETICS
(b)Closed system The patient rebreaths the exhaled gas
mixture after it has circulated through sodalime which absorbs
CO2. Only as much O 2 and anaesthetic as have been taken up by
the patient are added to the circuit. Flow rates are low. This is
especially useful for expensive and explosive agents (little
anaesthetic escapes in the surrounding air). Halothane, isoflurane,
desflurane can be used through closed system. However, control
of inhaled anaesthetic concentration is imprecise.
(c)Semiclosed system Partial rebreathing is allowed
through a partially closed valve. Conditions are intermediate
with moderate flow rates.
Properties of an ideal anaesthetic
A.For the patient It should be pleasant, non-
irritating, should not cause nausea or vomiting.
Induction and recovery should be fast with no
after effects.
B.For the surgeon It should provide adequate
analgesia, immobility and muscle relaxation.
It should be noninflammable and nonexplosive
so that cautery may be used.
C.For the anaesthetist Its administration
should be easy, controllable and versatile.
• Margin of safety should be wide—no fall in
BP.• Heart, liver and other organs should not be
affected.
• It should be potent so that low concentrations
are needed and oxygenation of the patient does
not suffer.
• Rapid adjustments in depth of anaesthesia
should be possible.
• It should be cheap, stable and easily stored.
• It should not react with rubber tubing or soda
lime.
The important physical and anaesthetic proper-
ties of inhalational anaesthetics are presented
in Table 27.1.
CLASSIFICATION
Inhalational
Gas Volatile liquids
Nitrous oxide Ether
Halothane
Isoflurane
Desflurane
Sevoflurane
TABLE 27.1 Physical and anaesthetic properties of inhalational anaesthetics
Anaesthetic Boiling Inflamma- Irritancy Oil: Gas Blood: Gas MAC Induction Muscle
point (°C) bility (odour) partition partition (%) relaxation
coefficient* coefficient*
 1. Ether 35 Infl. + +++ 65 12.1 1.9 Slow V. good
Explo. (Pungent)
 2. Halothane 50 Noninfl. – 224 2.3 0.75 Interm. Fair
(Pleasant)
 3. Isoflurane 48 Noninfl. ± 99 1.4 1.2 Interm. Good
(Unpleasant)
 4. Desflurane 24 Noninfl. + 19 0.42 6.0 Fast Good
(Unpleasant)
 5. Sevoflurane 59 Noninfl. – 50 0.68 2.0 Fast Good
(Pleasant)
 6. Nitrous oxide Gas Noninfl. – 1.4  0.47 105 Fast Poor
*At 37°C; Oil: gas and blood: gas partition coefficients are measures of solubility of the anaesthetic in lipid and blood
respectively.
MAC—Minimal alveolar concentration; Infl.—Inflammable; Explo.—Explosive; Interm.—Intermediate398
SECTION 7DRUGS ACTING ON CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Fig. 29.1: A normal sleep cycle
occur, which may be recalled if the subject is aroused. Heart
rate and BP fluctuate; respiration is irregular. Muscles are
fully relaxed, but irregular body movements occur occasionally.
Erection occurs in males. About 20–30% of sleep time is spent
in REM.
Normally stages 0 to 4 and REM occur in succession
over a period of 80–100 min. Then stages 1–4–REM are
repeated cyclically.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Barbiturates
Long acting Short acting Ultra-short
acting
Phenobarbitone Butobarbitone Thiopentone
Pentobarbitone Methohexitone
2.Benzodiazepines
Hypnotic Antianxiety Anticonvulsant
Diazepam Diazepam Diazepam
Flurazepam Chlordiazepoxide Lorazepam
Nitrazepam Oxazepam Clonazepam
Alprazolam Lorazepam Clobazam
Temazepam Alprazolam
Triazolam
3.Newer nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics
Zopiclone       Zolpidem       Zaleplon
Chloral hydrate, Triclophos, Paraldehyde, Glutethimide,
Methyprylon, Methaqualone and Meprobamate are historical
sedative-hypnotics no longer used. They are described in earlier
editions of this book.In addition some antihistaminics (promethazine,
diphenhydramine), some neuroleptic/antidepressants
(chlorpromazine, amitriptyline), some anticholinergic (hyoscine)
and opioids (morphine, pethidine) have significant sedative
action, but are not reliable for treatment of insomnia.
BARBITURATES
Barbiturates have been popular hypnotics and
sedatives of the last century upto 1960s, but are
not used now to promote sleep or to calm patients.
However, they are described first because they
are the prototype of CNS depressants.
Barbiturates are substituted derivatives of barbituric acid
(malonyl urea). Barbituric acid as such is not a hypnotic but
compounds with alkyl or aryl substitution on C5 are.
Replacement of O with S at C2 yields thiobarbiturates  which
are more lipid-soluble and more potent. Barbiturates have
variable lipid solubility, the more soluble ones are more potent
and shorter acting. They are insoluble in water but their sodium
salts dissolve yielding highly alkaline solution.
PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS
Barbiturates are general depressants for all
excitable cells, the CNS is most sensitive where
the effect is almost global, but certain areas are
more susceptible.
1. CNS Barbiturates produce dose-dependent
effects:
sedation  sleep  anaesthesia  coma.412
SECTION 7DRUGS ACTING ON CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
CLASSIFICATION
1.Barbiturate Phenobarbitone
2.Deoxybarbiturate Primidone
3.Hydantoin Phenytoin
Fosphenytoin
4.Iminostilbene Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine
5.Succinimide Ethosuximide
6.Aliphatic carboxylic Valproic acid
acid (sodium
valproate)
Divalproex
7.Benzodiazepines Clonazepam
Diazepam
Lorazepam
Clobazam
8.Phenyltriazine Lamotrigine
9.Cyclic GABA Gabapentin
analogues Pregabalin
10.Newer drugs Topiramate
Zonisamide
Levetiracetam
Vigabatrin
Tiagabine
Lacosamide
Felbamate, rufinamide  and few other newer antiseizure drugs
have been introduced in some countries as second line/add-on
drugs for refractory partial seizures.
Chemistry Most of the older anticonvulsants
have close structural similarity. This is depicted in
Fig. 30.1. However, benzodiazepines, carbamaze-
pine, valproic acid and the newer drugs are chemi-
cally diverse. Presence of a phenyl substitution
confers activity against tonic-clonic seizures.
Phenobarbitone  (see Ch. 29)
Phenobarbitone was the first efficacious anti-
epileptic introduced in 1912. The mechanism
of CNS depressant action of barbiturates is
described on p. 399. The same may apply to
anticonvulsant action. Enhancement of GABA A
receptor mediated synaptic inhibition appears to
be most important mechanism. However, pheno-
barbitone has specific anticonvulsant activity
which is not entirely dependent on general CNS
depression. Quantitative differences in thedifferent facets of action (GABA-facilitatory,
GABA-mimetic, antiglutamate, Ca2+ entry
reduction) have been noted for phenobarbitone
compared to hypnotic barbiturates. The higher
anticonvulsant: hypnotic ratio of phenobarbitone
may be due to its minimal effect on Ca2+ channels
and glutamate release compared to hypnotic bar-
biturates. With continued use of phenobarbitone
sedation wanes off but not anticonvulsant action.
It has a wide spectrum of anticonvulsant
property—raises seizure threshold as well as
limits spread and suppresses kindled seizures.
Phenobarbitone has slow oral absorption and
a long plasma t½ (80–120 hours), is metabo-
lized in liver as well as excreted unchanged by
kidney. Steady-state concentrations are reached
after 2–3 weeks, and a single daily dose can
be used for maintenance.
The major drawback of phenobarbitone as an
antiepileptic is its sedative action. Long term
administration (as needed in epilepsy) may
produce additional side effects like—behavioral
abnormalities, diminution of intelligence, impair-
ment of learning and memory, hyperactivity in
children, mental confusion in older people.
Rashes, megaloblastic anaemia and osteo-
malacia (similar to that with phenytoin) occur
in some patients on prolonged use.
Fig. 30.1: Chemical structures of classical
anticonvulsant drugsAntiparkinsonian Drugs ChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 3131313131
These are drugs that have a therapeutic effect
in parkinsonism.
Parkinsonism It is an extrapyramidal motor
disorder characterized by rigidity, tremor  and
hypokinesia  with secondary manifestations like
defective posture and gait, mask-like face and
sialorrhoea; dementia may accompany. If untrea-
ted the symptoms progress over several years
to end-stage disease in which the patient is rigid,
unable to move, unable to breathe properly;
succumbs mostly to chest infections/embolism.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive degenerative
disorder, mostly affecting older people, first described by
James Parkinson in 1817. Majority of the cases are idiopathic,
some are arteriosclerotic while postencephalitic are now rare.
Wilson’s disease (hepatolenticular degeneration) due to
chronic copper poisoning, is a rare cause.
The most consistent lesion in PD is degeneration of
neurones in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SN-PC) and
the nigrostriatal (dopaminergic) tract. This results in deficiency
of dopamine (DA) in the striatum which controls muscle tone
and coordinates movements. An imbalance between
dopaminergic (inhibitory) and cholinergic (excitatory) system
in the striatum occurs giving rise to the motor defect. Though
the cholinergic system is not primarily affected, its sup-
pression (by anticholinergics) tends to restore balance.
The cause of selective degeneration of nigrostriatal
neurones is not precisely known, but appears to be
multifactorial. Oxidation of DA by MAO-B and aldehyde
dehydrogenase generates hydroxyl free radicals (•OH) in the
presence of ferrous iron (basal ganglia are rich in iron).
Normally these free radicals are quenched by glutathione and
other protective mechanisms. Age-related and/or otherwise
acquired defect in protective mechanism allows the free
radicals to damage lipid membranes and DNA resulting in
neuronal degeneration. Genetic predisposition may contribute
to the high vulnerability of substantia nigra neurones.
Ageing induces defects in mitochondrial electron
transport chain. Environmental toxins and/or genetic factors
may accentuate these defects in specific areas. A synthetic
toxin N-methyl-4-phenyl tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), which
occurred as a contaminant of some illicit drugs, produces
nigrostriatal degeneration and manifestations similar to PD
by impairing energy metabolism in dopaminergic neurones.
It has been proposed that MPTP-like chemicals may be presentin the environment, small quantities of which accelerate age
related or otherwise predisposed neuronal degeneration of
parkinsonism, but there is no proof.
Excess of the excitatory transmitter glutamate can cause
‘excitotoxic’ neuronal death by inducing Ca2+ overload through
NMDA receptors.
Drug-induced temporary parkinsonism due to neuro-
leptics, metoclopramide (dopaminergic blockers) is now fairly
common, while that due to reserpine (DA depleter) is historical.
Belladonna alkaloids  had been empirically used
in PD. A breakthrough was made in 1967 when
levodopa  was found to produce dramatic
improvement. Its use was based on sound scien-
tific investigations made in the preceding 10
years that:
• DA is present in the brain;
• it (along with other monoamines) is depleted
by reserpine;
• reserpine induced motor defect is reversed
by DOPA (the precursor of DA);
• striatum of patients dying of PD was deficient
in DA.
Thus, parkinsonism was characterized as a DA
deficiency state and levodopa was used to make
good this deficiency, because DA itself does not
cross the blood-brain barrier. In the subsequent
years, a number of levodopa potentiators and DA
agonists have been developed as adjuvants/
alternatives.
CLASSIFICATION
I.Drugs affecting brain dopaminergic
system
(a)Dopamine precursor  : Levodopa (l-dopa)
(b)Peripheral decarboxylase inhibitors  :
Carbidopa, Benserazide.
(c)Dopaminergic agonists : Bromocriptine,
Ropinirole, Pramipexole
(d)MAO-B inhibitor: Selegiline, Rasagiline
(e)COMT inhibitors: Entacapone, Tolcapone436
SECTION 7DRUGS ACTING ON CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
(c)Obsessive-compulsive disorder Limited abnormality
of thought or behaviour; recurrent intrusive thoughts or ritual-
like behaviours which the patient realizes are abnormal or stupid,
but is not able to overcome even on voluntary effort. The
obsessions generate considerable anxiety and distress.
(d)Reactive depression due to physical illness, loss, blow
to self-esteem or bereavement, but is excessive or dispro-
portionate.
(e)Post-traumatic stress disorder Varied symptoms fol-
lowing distressing experiences like war, riots, earthquakes, etc.
(f)Hysterical Dramatic symptoms resembling serious
physical illness, but situational, and always in the presence
of others; the patient does not feign but actually undergoes
the symptoms, though the basis is only psychic and not
physical.
Pathophysiology of mental illness is not clear,
though some ideas have been formed, e.g. dopa-
minergic overactivity in the limbic system may
be involved in schizophrenia and mania, while
monoaminergic (NA, 5-HT) deficit may underlie
depression. Treatment is empirical, symptom
oriented and not disease specific. However, it
is highly effective in many situations. Depending
on the primary use, the psychotropic drugs may
be grouped into:
1.Antipsychotic (neuroleptic, ataractic,
major tranquillizer) useful in all types of
functional psychosis, especially schizophrenia.
(The term ‘Neuroleptic’ is applied to chlorpromazine/haloperidol-
like conventional antipsychotic drugs which have potent D2
receptor blocking activity and produce psychic indifference,
emotional quietening with extrapyramidal symptoms, but
without causing ataxia or cognitive impairment.)
2.Antimanic (mood stabiliser) used to control
mania and to break into cyclic affective disorders.
3.Antidepressants used for minor as well as
major depressive illness, phobic states,
obsessive-compulsive behaviour, and certain
anxiety disorders.
4.Antianxiety (anxiolytic-sedative, minor tran-
quillizer) used for anxiety and phobic states.
5.Psychotomimetic (psychedelic, psycho-
dysleptic, hallucinogen). They are seldom used
therapeutically, but produce psychosis-like states.
Majority of them are drugs of abuse, e.g. cannabis,
LSD.
Tranquillizer It is an old term meaning “a drug which
reduces mental tension and produces calmness withoutinducing sleep or depressing mental faculties.” This term was
used to describe the effects of reserpine or chlorpromazine.
However, it has been interpreted differently by different people;
some extend it to cover both chlorpromazine-like and
antianxiety drugs, others feel that it should be restricted to
the antianxiety drugs only. Their division into major and minor
tranquillizers is not justified, because the ‘minor tranquillizers’
(diazepam-like drugs) are not less important drugs: they are
more frequently prescribed and carry higher abuse liability
than the ‘major tranquillizers’ (chlorpromazine-like drugs). The
term tranquillizer is, therefore, best avoided.
ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS
(Neuroleptics)
These are drugs having a salutary therapeutic
effect in psychoses.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Phenothiazines
Aliphatic side chain : Chlorpromazine
Triflupromazine
Piperidine side chain : Thioridazine
Piperazine side chain : Trifluoperazine
Fluphenazine
2.Butyrophenones Haloperidol
Trifluperidol
Penfluridol
3.Thioxanthenes Flupenthixol
4.Other heterocyclics Pimozide, Loxapine
5.Atypical antipsychotics
Clozapine Aripiprazole
Risperidone Ziprasidone
Olanzapine Amisulpiride
Quetiapine Zotepine
Drugs Used in Mental Illness:
Antidepressant and Antianxiety
DrugsChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 3333333333
Major depression and mania are two extremes
of affective disorders which refer to a patho-
logical change in mood state. Major depression
is characterized by symptoms like sad mood,
loss of interest and pleasure, low energy,
worthlessness, guilt, psychomotor retardation or
agitation, change in appetite and/or sleep,
melancholia, suicidal thoughts, etc. It may be
a unipolar or a bipolar disorder in which cycles
of mood swings from mania to depression occur
over time. The mood change may have a
psychotic basis with delusional thinking or
occur in isolation and induce anxiety. On the
other hand, pathological anxiety may lead to
depression. Anxiety and depression are the
leading psychiatric disorders now.
ANTIDEPRESSANTS
These are drugs which can elevate mood in
depressive illness. Practically all antidepressants
affect monoaminergic transmission in the brain
in one way or the other, and many of them have
other associated properties. Over the past three
decades, a large number of antidepressants with
an assortment of effects on reuptake/metabolism
of biogenic amines, and on pre/post-junctional
aminergic/cholinergic receptors have become
available so that a cogent classification is
difficult. The following working classification
may be adopted.
CLASSIFICATION
I.Reversible inhibitors of MAO-A (RIMAs)
Moclobemide, Clorgyline
II.Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
A.NA + 5-HT reuptake inhibitors
Imipramine, Amitriptyline,Trimipramine, Doxepin, Dothiepin,
Clomipramine
B.Predominantly NA reuptake inhibitors
Desipramine, Nortriptyline, Amoxapine,
Reboxetine
III.Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs)
Fluoxetine, Fluvoxamine, Paroxetine,
Sertraline, Citalopram, Escitalopram,
Dapoxetine
IV.Serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs)
Venlafaxine, Duloxetine
V.Atypical antidepressants
Trazodone, Mianserin, Mirtazapine,
Bupropion, Tianeptine, Amineptine,
Atomoxetine
Many other drugs like Protriptyline, Maprotiline, Nafazodone,
etc. are marketed in other countries.
MAO INHIBITORS
MAO is a mitochondrial enzyme involved in the oxidative
deamination of biogenic amines (Adr, NA, DA, 5-HT). Two
isoenzyme forms of MAO have been identified.
MAO-A: Preferentially deaminates 5-HT and NA, and
is inhibited by clorgyline, moclobemide.
MAO-B: Preferentially deaminates phenylethylamine and
is inhibited by selegiline.
Dopamine is degraded equally by both isoenzymes.
Their distribution also differs. Peripheral adrenergic nerve
endings, intestinal mucosa and human placenta contain
predominantly MAO-A, while MAO-B predominates in certain
areas (mainly serotonergic) of brain and in platelets. Liver
contains both isoenzymes.
Two hydrazine drugs— isoniazid and iproniazid  were
used for tuberculosis in 1951; the latter was especially found
to cause disproportionate elevation of mood. Its capacity to
inhibit degradation of biogenic amines was soon discovered
and was believed to be responsible for the mood elevating
action. Its less hepatotoxic congeners like phenelzine and465
CHAPTER 33ANTIDEPRESSANT AND ANTIANXIETY DRUGS
8.Migraine:  Amitriptyline  has some prophy-
lactic value, especially in patients with mixed
headaches.
9.Pruritus: Some tricyclics have antipruritic
action. Topical doxepin has been used to relieve
itching in atopic dermatitis, lichen simplex, etc.
NOCTADERM 5% cream.
ANTIANXIETY DRUGS
Anxiety It is an emotional state, unpleasant
in nature, associated with uneasiness, discomfort
and concern or fear about some defined or
undefined future threat. Some degree of anxiety
is a part of normal life. Treatment is needed
when it is disproportionate to the situation and
excessive. Some psychotics and depressed
patients also exhibit pathological anxiety.
Cardiac neurosis (unfounded fear of heart disease—
palpitation, functional precordial pain); g.i. neurosis (fixation
on bowel movement, distention, eructation, reflux, acidity);
social anxiety (fear of being observed and evaluated by
others); obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), post-traumatic
stress disorder and various forms of phobias are some specific
types of anxiety disorders.
Antianxiety drugs These are an ill-defined
group of drugs, mostly mild CNS depressants,
which are aimed to control the symptoms of
anxiety, produce a restful state of mind without
interfering with normal mental or physical
functions. The anxiolytic-sedative drugs differ
markedly from antipsychotics, and more closely
resemble sedative-hypnotics. They:
1. Have no therapeutic effect to control thought
disorder of schizophrenia.
2. Do not produce extrapyramidal side effects.
3. Have anticonvulsant property.
4. Produce physical dependence and carry abuse
liability.
5. Do not selectively block conditioned avoi-
dance response in animals.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Benzodiazepines Diazepam
Chlordiazepoxide
Oxazepam
Lorazepam, Alprazolam2.Azapirones Buspirone, Gepirone,
Ispapirone
3.Sedative Hydroxyzine
antihistaminic
4. blocker Propranolol
In addition to the above drugs, antidepres-
sants, especially the SSRIs and SNRIs are
effective in OCD, phobias, panic and many types
of severe generalized anxiety disorders.
BENZODIAZEPINES
The pharmacology of benzodiazepines (BZDs)
as a class is described in Ch. 29.
Some members have a slow and prolonged
action, relieve anxiety at low doses without
producing significant CNS depression. They have
a selective taming effect on aggressive animals
and suppress induced aggression. They also
suppress the performance impairing effect of
punishment. In contrast to barbiturates, they are
more selective for the limbic system and have
proven clinically better in both quality and
quantity of improvement in anxiety and stress-
related symptoms.
At antianxiety doses, cardiovascular and
respiratory depression is minor.
Because anxiety is a common complaint and
is a part of most physical and mental illness,
and because the BZDs—
•have little effect on other body systems
•have lower dependence producing liability
than barbiturates and other sedatives;
withdrawal syndrome is milder and delayed
due to their long half lives
•are relatively safe even in gross overdosage,
they are presently one of the widely used class
of drugs. Potent BZDs like lorazepam and
clonazepam injected i.m. have adjuvant role in
the management of acutely psychotic and manic
patients.
BZDs act primarily by facilitating inhibitory
GABAergic transmission, but other additional
mechanisms of action have been suggested.
Higher doses induce sleep and impair perfor-
mance.474
SECTION 7DRUGS ACTING ON CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
4. Head injury: morphine is contraindicated in
patients with head injury. Reasons are—
•By retaining CO 2, it increases intracranial
tension which will add to that caused by head
injury itself.
•Even therapeutic doses can cause marked
respiratory depression in these patients.
•Vomiting, miosis and altered mentation pro-
duced by morphine interfere with assessment
of progress in head injury cases.
5. Hypotensive states and hypovolaemia exag-
gerate fall in BP due to morphine.
6. Undiagnosed acute abdominal pain: morphine
can aggravate certain conditions, e.g. diverti-
culitis, biliary colic, pancreatitis. Inflamed
appendix may rupture. Morphine can be given
after the diagnosis is established. Pentazocine,
buprenorphine are less likely to aggravate biliary
spasm.
7. Elderly male: chances of urinary retention
are high.
8. Hypothyroidism, liver and kidney disease
patients are more sensitive to morphine.
9. Unstable personalities: are liable to continue
with its use and become addicted.
Interactions
Phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, MAO
inhibitors, amphetamine and neostigmine poten-
tiate morphine and other opioids, either by retar-
ding its metabolism or by a pharmacodynamic
interaction at the level of central neurotrans-
mitters.
Morphine retards absorption of many orally
administered drugs by delaying gastric emptying.
Dose: 10–50 mg oral, 10–15 mg i.m. or s.c. or 2–6 mg i.v.; 2–3 mg
epidural/intrathecal; children 0.1–0.2 mg/kg. i.m. or s.c.
MORPHINE SULPHATE 10 mg/ml inj; MORCONTIN 10, 30, 60,
100 mg continuous release tabs; 30–100 mg BD; RILIMORF 10,
20 mg tabs, 60 mg SR tab.
CLASSIFICATION OF OPIOIDS
1.Natural opium alkaloids:  Morphine, Codeine
2.Semisynthetic opiates : Diacetylmorphine
(Heroin), Pholcodeine, Ethylmorphine.Many others like—Hydromorphone, Oxymorphone, Hydro-
codone, Oxycodone are not used in India.
3.Synthetic opioids: Pethidine (Meperidine),
Fentanyl, Methadone, Dextropropoxyphene,
Tramadol.
Many others like—Levorphanol, Dextromoramide, Dipipanone,
Alfentanil, Sufentanil, Remifentanil are not available in India.
1. Codeine It is methyl-morphine, occurs
naturally in opium, and is partly converted in
the body to morphine. It is less potent than
morphine (1/10th as analgesic), also less effica-
cious; is a partial agonist at  opioid receptor
with a low ceiling effect. The degree of analgesia
is comparable to aspirin (60 mg codeine ~ 600
mg aspirin); can relieve mild to moderate pain
only.
However, codeine is more selective cough
suppressant (1/3rd as potent as morphine);
subanalgesic doses (10–30 mg) suppress cough
(see p. 220). Codeine has very low affinity for
opioid receptors. The analgesic action has been
ascribed to morphine generated by its demethy-
lation by CYP2D6. Codeine fails to produce
analgesia in subjects with polymorphic CYP2D6
who cannot demethylate codeine. However,
receptors involved in the antitussive action
appear to be distinct, because they bind codeine
as well as morphine.
Codeine has good activity by the oral route
(oral: parenteral ratio 1:2). A single oral dose
acts for 4–6 hours. Constipation is a prominent
side effect when it is used as analgesic. Codeine
has been used to control diarrhoea ( see Ch. 48).
Other side effects are milder. The abuse liability
is low. Though codeine phosphate is water
soluble and can be injected, parenteral pre-
paration is not available.
2. Pholcodeine , Ethylmorphine They have codeine
like properties and have been used mainly as antitussive ( see
p. 220); claimed to be less constipating.
3. Heroin (Diamorphine, Diacetylmorphine) It is about 3
times more potent than morphine; more lipid soluble, therefore
enters the brain more rapidly, but duration of action is similar.
It is considered to be more euphorient (especially on i.v.
injection) and highly addicting. Because of its high potency,
it has been favoured in illicit drug trafficking. The sedative,CNS Stimulants and
Cognition EnhancersChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 3535353535
CNS STIMULANTS
These are drugs whose primary action is to
stimulate the CNS globally or to improve
specific brain functions.
The CNS stimulants mostly produce a
generalized action which may, at high doses,
result in convulsions. Given below is a working
classification based primarily on the clinical use,
because clearcut differences do not exist.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Convulsants Strychnine, Picrotoxin,
Bicuculline, Pentylenetetrazol (PTZ).
2.Analeptics Doxapram
3.Psychostimulants Amphetamines,
Methylphenidate, Atomoxetine, Modafinil,
Armodafinil, Pemoline, Cocaine, Caffeine.
Many other drugs are capable of causing CNS
stimulation as side effect or at high doses.
I.  CONVULSANTS
1. Strychnine It is an alkaloid from the seeds of Strychnos
nux-vomica,  and a potent convulsant. The convulsions are
reflex, tonic-clonic and symmetrical. It has been labelled as a
spinal convulsant because the dose producing convulsions is
the same in spinal animals as in intact animals; actually it
stimulates the whole cerebrospinal axis.
Strychnine acts by blocking post-synaptic  inhibition
produced by the inhibitory transmitter glycine. One of the sites
that has been clearly demonstrated is the Renshaw cell-
motoneurone junction in the spinal cord through which
inhibition of antagonistic muscles is achieved. Due to loss of
synaptic inhibition, any nerve impulse becomes generalized,
resulting in apparent excitation and convulsions.
There are no valid uses of strychnine now. Accidental
poisonings, especially in children, do occur. Treatment of
poisoning is similar to that of status epilepticus ( see Ch. 30).
2. Picrotoxin Obtained from ‘fish berries’ of East
Indies Anamirta cocculus.  It is a potent convulsant—
convulsions are clonic, spontaneous and asymmetrical. The
convulsions are accompanied by vomiting, respiratory andvasomotor stimulation. Though regarded as a medullary
stimulant, it has little selectivity in site of action.
Picrotoxin acts by blocking presynaptic  inhibition mediated
through GABA. However, it is not a competitive antagonist;
does not act on GABA receptor itself, but on a distinct site and
prevents Cl¯ channel opening ( see p. 403). Diazepam, which
facilitates GABAergic transmission, is the drug of choice for
picrotoxin poisoning. Picrotoxin has no therapeutic indication
now.
3. Bicuculline This synthetic convulsant has picrotoxin-
like actions. It is a competitive GABA A receptor (intrinsic Cl¯
channel receptor) antagonist, while GABA B receptor (G-protein
coupled receptor) is insensitive to it. It is only a research tool.
4. Pentylenetetrazol (PTZ, Metrazol, Leptazol) It is
a powerful CNS stimulant, believed to be acting by direct
depolarization of central neurones. However, it has also been
shown to interfere with GABAergic inhibition—may be acting
in a manner analogous to picrotoxin.
Low doses cause excitation, larger doses produce
convulsions which are similar in pattern to those caused by
picrotoxin. Antagonism of PTZ induced convulsions is an
established method of testing anticonvulsant drugs in
laboratory animals ( see Ch. 30).
II.  ANALEPTICS (Respiratory stimulants)
These are drugs which stimulate respiration and can have
resuscitative value in coma or fainting. They do stimulate
respiration in subconvulsive doses, but margin of safety is
narrow; the patient may get convulsions while still in coma.
Mechanical support to respiration and other measures to
improve circulation are more effective and safe.
The role of analeptics in therapeutics is very limited.
Situations in which they may be employed are:
(a) As an expedient measure in hypnotic drug poisoning untill
mechanical ventilation is instituted.
(b) Suffocation on drowning, acute respiratory insufficiency.
(c) Apnoea in premature infant.
(d) Failure to ventilate spontaneously after general anaesthesia.
However, the overall utility of analeptics is dubious.
Doxapram It acts by promoting excitation of central
neurones. At low doses it is more selective for the respiratory
centre than other analeptics. Respiration is stimulated through
carotid and aortic body chemoreceptors as well. Falling BP rises.
Continuous i.v. infusion of doxapram may abolish episodes of
apnoea in premature infant not responding to theophylline.
Other uses: see above.528
SECTION 8CARDIOVASCULAR DRUGS
6.Torsades de pointes  (French: twisting of
points) is a life-threatening form of polymor-
phic ventricular tachycardia with rapid
asynchronous complexes and an undulating
baseline on ECG. It is generally associated with
long Q-T interval.
7.Ventricular fibrillation (VF)  is grossly
irregular, rapid and fractionated activation of
ventricles resulting in incoordinated contraction
of its fibres with loss of pumping function.
It is  fatal unless reverted within 2–5 min;
is the most common cause of sudden cardiac
death.
8.Atrio-ventricular (A-V) block is due to
depression of impulse conduction through the
A-V node and bundle of His, mostly due to
vagal influence or ischaemia.
First degree A-V block:  Slowed conduction
resulting in prolonged P-R interval.
Second degree A-V block:  Some supra-
ventricular complexes are not conducted: drop
beats.
Third degree A-V block:  No supraventricular
complexes are conducted; ventricle generates
its own impulse; complete heart block.
Proarrhythmic potential of antiarrhythmic drugs
Most antiarrhythmics can themselves be the cause of serious
arrhythmias, especially during long-term prophylactic use.
Two multicentric trials ‘Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial
I and II’ (CAST I, II, 1991, 1992) showed that post-MI
patients randomized to receive on a long-term basis encainide,
flecainide, moricizine had higher incidence of sudden death,
though initially the same drugs had suppressed VES in these
patients. It is possible that during transient episodes of
ischaemia, the intraventricular conduction slowing action of
these drugs gets markedly accentuated resulting in VT and
VF. Similar increased mortality has been reported by the
“Mortality in the survival with D-sotalol (SWORD) trial.
It is therefore not prudent to try and suppress all extrasystoles/
arrhythmias, especially those not causing symptoms, with
chronic prophylactic antiarrhythmic therapy. Only the 
blockers and amiodarone have been found to decrease cardiac
mortality in the long term.
CLASSIFICATION
Antiarrhythmic drugs act by blocking myocardial
Na+, K+ or Ca2+ channels. Some have additional
or even primary autonomic effects. Classificationof antiarrhythmic drugs has been difficult, because
many drugs have more than one action. Vaughan
Williams and Singh (1969) proposed a 4 class
system which takes into account the primary
electrophysiological action of a drug that may
serve to indicate the type of clinical effects and
therapeutic utility. However, different drugs within
a class have their own specific set of properties.
A simplified clinical classification of anti-
arrhythmic drugs is given at the end of the chapter.
CLASS I
The primary action of drugs in this class is to
limit the conductance of Na+ (and K+) across cell
membrane—a local anaesthetic action. They also
reduce rate of phase-4 depolarization in automatic
cells.
SUBCLASS IA
The subclass IA containing the oldest anti-
arrhythmic drugs quinidine and procainamide  are
open state Na+ channel blockers which also
moderately delay channel recovery (channel
recovery time recovery 1–10s), suppress A-V
conduction and prolong refractoriness. The Na+
channel blockade is greater at higher frequency
(premature depolarization is affected more). These
actions serve to extinguish ectopic pacemakers
that are often responsible for triggered arrhythmias
and abolish reentry by converting unidirectional
block into bidirectional block.Drugs that prolong Q-T interval
(have potential to precipitate Torsades de pointes)
1.Antiarrhythmics :Quinidine, procainamide,
disopyramide, propafenone,
amiodarone
2.Antimalarials :Quinine, mefloquine,
artemisinin, halofantrine
3.Antibacterials :Sparfloxacin, moxifloxacin
4.Antihistaminics :Terfenadine, astemizole, ebastine
5.Antidepressants :Amitryptyline and other tricyclics
6.Antipsychotics :Thioridazine, pimozide,
aripiprazole, ziprasidone
7.Prokinetic :Cisapride529
CHAPTER 38ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS
Antiarrhythmic drugs
Class Actions Drugs
I.Membrane stabilizing agents
(Na+ channel blockers)
A.Moderately decrease dv/dt of 0 phase Quinidine, Procainamide, Disopyramide
B.Little decrease in dv/dt of 0 phase Lidocaine, Mexiletine
C.Marked decrease in dv/dt of 0 phase Propafenone, Flecainide
II.Antiadrenergic agents ( blockers) Propranolol, Esmolol, Sotalol (also class III)
III.Agents widening AP Amiodarone, Dronedarone
(prolong repolarization and ERP ) Dofetilide, Ibutilide
IV.Calcium channel blockers Verapamil, Diltiazem
Note: Class IA agents also have Class III property; Propranolol has Class I action as well; sotalol has both
Class II and Class III actions.
In addition
1.For PSVT : Adenosine, Digoxin
2.For A-V block : Sympathomimetics—Isoprenaline, etc.
Anticholinergics—Atropine.
3. Digitalis is used in AF, AFl and PSVT to control ventricular rate.
Quinidine
It is the dextro isomer of the antimalarial alkaloid quinine
found in cinchona bark. In addition to Na+ channel blockade,
quinidine has cardiac antivagal action which augments
prolongation of atrial ERP and minimizes RP disparity
of atrial fibres. A-V node ERP is increased by direct
action of quinidine, but decreased by its antivagal action;
overall effect is inconsistent. Quinidine depresses myocardial
contractility; failure may be precipitated in damaged
hearts.
ECG: Quinidine increases P-R and Q-T intervals and tends
to broaden QRS complex. Changes in the shape of T wave
may be seen reflecting effect on repolarization.
Mechanism of action: Quinidine blocks myocardial Na+
channels in the open state—reduces automaticity and maximal
rate of 0 phase depolarization in a frequency dependent
manner. Prolongation of APD is due to K+ channel block,
while lengthening of ERP is caused by its moderate effect
on recovery of Na+ and K+ channels. At high concentrations
it also inhibits L type Ca2+ channels. Quinidine decreases
the availability of Na+ channels as well as delays their
reactivation.
The other actions of quinidine are fall in BP (due to
weak  adrenergic blockade and direct cardiac depression),
decreased skeletal muscle contractility, augmented uterine
contractions, vomiting, diarrhoea and neurological effects
like ringing in ears, vertigo, deafness, visual disturbances
and mental changes (Cinchonism). Like its levo isomer, it
has antimalarial action, and has been used as a parenteral
alternative to quinine for falciparum malaria. The important
drug interactions of quinidine are:• Rise in blood levels and toxicity of digoxin due to
displacement from tissue binding and inhibition of P-
glycoprotein mediated renal and biliary clearance of
digoxin.
• Marked fall in BP in patients receiving vasodilators.
• Risk of torsades de pointes is increased by hypokalaemia
caused by diuretics.
• Synergistic cardiac depression with -blockers,
verapamil, K+ salts.
• Quinidine inhibits CYP2D6: prolongs t½ of propafenone
and inhibits conversion of codeine to morphine.
Use: Though quinidine is effective in many atrial and
ventricular arrhythmias, it is seldom used now, because of
risk of adverse effects, including that of torsades de pointes ,
sudden cardiac arrest or VF; idiosyncratic angioedema,
vascular collapse, thrombocytopenia, etc. In a dose of
100–200 mg TDS quinidine may rarely be used to maintain
sinus rhythm after termination of AF or AFI.
QUINIDINE SULPHATE 200 mg tab; QUININGA 300 mg
tab, 600 mg/2 ml inj; NATCARDINE 100 mg tab.
Procainamide
It is orally active amide derivative of the local
anaesthetic procaine, with cardiac electrophysio-
logical actions almost identical to those of
quinidine, viz. slowing of 0 phase depolarization
and impulse conduction, prolongation of APD,
ERP, QRS complex and Q-T interval.  Significant
differences between the two are:537
CHAPTER 38ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS
Clinical classification of antiarrhythmic drugs
Supraventricular Supraventricular and Ventricular arrhythmias
arrhythmias only ventricular arrhythmias only
Adenosine Amiodarone Procainamide Lidocaine
Verapamil  blockers Disopyramide Mexiletine
Diltiazem Propranolol Quinidine
Dronedarone Sotalol Flecainide
Digoxin Esmolol PropafenoneDrugs for A-V Block
The definitive treatment of chronic heart block
is pacing with an implanted cardiac pacemaker.
Drugs are of value only for acute/transient A-V
block and as an interim measure.
Atropine: When A-V block is due to vagal
overactivity, e.g. digitalis toxicity, some cases
of MI; it can be improved by atropine 0.6–1.2
mg i.m. Atropine abbreviates A-V node ERP
and increases conduction velocity in bundle of
His.
Sympathomimetics  (Adr, isoprenaline): These
drugs may overcome partial heart block by
facilitating A-V conduction and shortening ERP
of conducting tissues.
They may also be used in complete (3rd
degree) heart block to maintain a sufficient
idioventricular rate (by increasing automaticity
of ventricular pacemakers) till external pacemaker
can be implanted.
Choice and use of antiarrhythmic drugs
Mere detection of an arrhythmia does not
necessitate treatment.
Asymptomatic arrhythmias and those which
do not jeopardize haemodynamics, e.g. most AES
and occasional VES, first degree A-V block,
bundle branch block, etc. in an otherwise normal
heart, do not require antiarrhythmic treatment;
reassurance is enough. If a patient is particularly
disturbed by AES, propranolol is the best option.
Chronic prophylactic therapy with class I and class
IV antiarrhythmics does not appear to afford
survival benefit, except in few selected cases. Onlypropranolol and to some extent amiodarone have
been shown to reduce cardiovascular mortality
in the long-term. On the other hand, vigorous
therapy is indicated when:
• Arrhythmia is life-threatening, e.g. sustained
VT, torsades de pointes, VF.
• Arrhythmia is causing hypotension, breath-
lessness, activity limitation or cardiac failure.
• Palpitation is marked, e.g. in PSVT, sustained
VT, AF, torsades de pointes.
• When simple arrhythmia may lead to more
serious ones, e.g. after MI (warning arrhy-
thmias).
In the above situations antiarrhythmics are mostly
needed for short periods. Majority of antiarrhy-
thmic drugs have narrow margin of safety. A
simple clinical classification of antiarrhythmic
drugs is presented in the box below.
The selection of an antiarrhythmic in a patient
depends on:
(a) ECG diagnosis
(b) Possible mechanism underlying the arrhythmia
(c) Mechanism of action and range of anti-
arrhythmic activity of the drug
(d) Pharmacokinetic profile of the drug.
(e) Haemodynamic effects of the drug.
The aim is to improve cardiovascular function
either by restoring sinus rhythm, or by controlling
ventricular rate, or by conversion to a more
desirable pattern of electrical and mechanical
activity.
Despite extensive investigation, choice of an
antiarrhythmic is still largely empirical. A practical
guide to the choice and use of antiarrhythmic
drugs is summarized in the box on next page.540
SECTION 8CARDIOVASCULAR DRUGS
recurrent localized (occasionally diffuse) coronary
vasospasm (Fig. 39.2) which may be superimposed
on arteriosclerotic coronary artery disease.
Abnormally reactive and hypertrophied segments
in the coronary arteries have been demonstrated.
Drugs are aimed at preventing and relieving the
coronary vasospasm.
Unstable angina (UA) with rapid increase in
duration and severity of attacks is mostly due
to rupture of an atheromatous plaque attracting
platelet deposition and progressive occlusion of
the coronary artery; occasionally with associated
coronary vasospasm.
Chronically reduced blood supply causes atro-
phy of cardiac muscle with fibrous replacement
(reduced myocardial work capacity  CHF) and
may damage conducting tissue to produce unstable
cardiac rhythms. Antianginal drugs relieve cardiac
ischaemia but do not alter the course of coronary
artery pathology: no permanent benefit is afforded.
On the other hand, aspirin, ACE inhibitors and
statins (hypocholesterolaemic) can modify
coronary artery disease and improve prognosis.
Glyceryl trinitrate , the drug unsurpassed in its ability to
abort and terminate anginal attack, was introduced by Murrell
in 1879. Other organic nitrates were added later, but a
breakthrough was achieved in 1963 when propranolol was
used for chronic prophylaxis. The calcium channel blockers
have been a major contribution of the 1970s. A number
of vasodilator and other drugs have been promoted from
time to time, but none is as uniformly effective. Some
potassium channel openers (nicorandil),  metabolic modulator
(trimetazidine) and late Na+ current inhibitor (ranolazine)
have been introduced lately.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Nitrates
(a)Short acting: Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN,
Nitroglycerine)
(b)Long acting : Isosorbide dinitrate (short
acting by sublingual route), Isosorbide
mononitrate, Erythrityl tetranitrate,
Pentaerythritol tetranitrate
2. Blockers Propranolol, Metoprolol, Atenolol
and others.
3.Calcium channel blockers
(a)Phenyl alkylamine : Verapamil(b)Benzothiazepine:  Diltiazem
(c)Dihydropyridines:  Nifedipine, Felodipine,
Amlodipine, Nitrendipine, Nimodipine,
Lacidipine, Lercanidipine, Benidipine
4.Potassium channel opener Nicorandil
5.Others Dipyridamole, Trimetazidine,
Ranolazine, Ivabradine, Oxyphedrine
Clinical classification
A.Used to abort or terminate attack GTN,
Isosorbide dinitrate (sublingually).
B.Used for chronic prophylaxis All other drugs.
NITRATES (GTN as prototype)
All organic nitrates share the same action; differ
only in time course. The only major action is
direct nonspecific smooth muscle relaxation.
Preload reduction The most prominent action
is exerted on vascular smooth muscle. Nitrates
dilate veins more than arteries  peripheral
pooling of blood  decreased venous return, i.e.
preload on heart is reduced  end diastolic size
and pressure are reduced  decreased cardiac
work according to Laplace relationship —which
describes the effectiveness of ventricular wall
tension in elevating intraventricular pressure and
the extent to which fibre shortening results in
systolic ejection.
Wall tension = intraventricular pressure ×
ventricular radius
Thus, reduction in ventricular radius decreases
the tension that must be generated in the ventri-
cular wall—hence decreased O 2 consumption.
Reduction in cardiac output (c.o.) occurs at rest
but is less marked during angina due to better
ventricular emptying. The decrease in end diastolic
pressure abolishes the subendocardial crunch by
restoring the pressure gradient across ventricular
wall due to which subendocardial perfusion occurs
during diastole. It is through their action on
peripheral veins that nitrates exert major beneficial
effects in classical angina.Antihypertensive Drugs ChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 4040404040
These are drugs used to lower BP in hypertension.
Hypertension is a very common disorder,
particularly past middle age. It is not a disease
in itself, but is an important risk factor for cardio-
vascular mortality and morbidity. The cutoff
manometric reading between normotensives and
hypertensives is arbitrary. For practical purposes
‘hypertension’ could be that level of BP at or
above which long-term antihypertensive treatment
will reduce cardiovascular mortality. The JNC 7*
(2003) and WHO-ISH@ guidelines (2003) have
defined it to be 140 mm Hg systolic and 90 mm
Hg diastolic, though risk appears to increase even
above 120/80 mm Hg. Epidemiological studies
have confirmed that higher the pressure (systolic
or diastolic or both) greater is the risk of
cardiovascular disease.
Majority of cases are of essential (primary)
hypertension, i.e. the cause is not known. Sympa-
thetic and renin-angiotensin systems (RAS) may
or may not be overactive, but they do contribute
to the tone of blood vessels and c.o. in hyper-
tensives, as they do in normotensives. Many
antihypertensive drugs interfere with these
regulatory systems at one level or the other.
Antihypertensive drugs, by chronically lowering
BP, may reset the barostat to function at a lower
level of BP.
Antihypertensive drug therapy has been remarkably improved
in the last 60 years. Different classes of drugs have received
prominence with passage of time in this period. Before 1950
hardly any effective and tolerated antihypertensive was
available. Veratrum and Sod. thiocyanate  could lower BP,
but were toxic and difficult to use. The ganglion blockers
developed in the 1950s were effective, but inconvenient.
Reserpine  was a breakthrough, but produced mentaldepression. The therapeutic potential of hydralazine  could
not be tapped fully because of marked side effects when it
was used alone. Guanethidine  introduced in 1961 was an
improvement on ganglion blockers. The antihypertensives of
the 1960–70s were methyldopa,  blockers , thiazide and
high ceiling diuretics  and clonidine. The status of  blockers
and diuretics was consolidated in the 1970s and selective
1 blocker prazosin broke new grounds. The antihypertensives
of the 1980–90s are angiotensin II converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors  and calcium channel blockers . Angiotensin
receptor blockers ( losartan, etc.) were added soon after,
and the direct renin inhibitor aliskiren is the latest drug.
With the development of many types of drugs, delineation
of their long-term benefits and complications, and
understanding of the principles on which to combine them,
hypertension can now be controlled in most cases with
minimum discomfort.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Diuretics
Thiazides: Hydrochlorothiazide,
Chlorthalidone, Indapamide
High ceiling: Furosemide, etc.
K+ Sparing: Spironolactone, Amiloride
2.ACE inhibitors
Captopril, Enalapril, Lisinopril,
Perindopril, Ramipril, Fosinopril, etc.
3.Angiotensin (AT 1 receptor) blockers
Losartan, Candesartan, Irbesartan, Valsartan,
Telmisartan
4.Direct renin inhibitor
Aliskiren
5.Calcium channel blockers
Verapamil, Diltiazem, Nifedipine, Felodipine,
Amlodipine, Nitrendipine, Lacidipine, etc.
6. Adrenergic blockers
Propranolol, Metoprolol, Atenolol, etc.
* JNC 7—The seventh report of Joint  National Committee (of USA) on prevention, detection, evaluation and treatment of high
blood pressure.
@ WHO-ISH—World Health Organization and International Society of Hypertension.568
SECTION 8CARDIOVASCULAR DRUGS
relaxes vascular smooth muscle. This occurs both
enzymatically and nonenzymatically. The enzymes
involved are different from those that produce
NO from glyceryl trinitrate. Nonenzymatically it
is converted to NO (and CN) by glutathione. This
may be responsible for the different pattern of
vasodilator action compared to nitrates, as well
as for the fact that no nitrate like tolerance
develops to nitroprusside action.
Nitroprusside has gained popularity in the
management of hypertensive emergencies; 50 mg
is added to a 500 ml bottle of saline/glucose
solution. The infusion is started at 0.02 mg/min
and titrated upward with the response: 0.1–0.3
mg/min is often needed. It decomposes at alkaline
pH and on exposure to light: the infusion bottle
should be covered with black paper.
Nitroprusside is split to release cyanide. The
latter is converted in liver to thiocyanate which
is excreted slowly. If larger doses are infused
for more than 1–2 days, excess thiocyanate may
accumulate and produce toxicity, including
psychosis.
Side effects mainly due to vasodilatation are—
palpitation, nervousness, vomiting, perspiration,
pain in abdomen, weakness, disorientation, and
lactic acidosis (caused by the released cyanide).
Nitroprusside has also been used to produce
controlled hypotension, in refractory CHF ( see
p. 522), pump failure accompanying MI and in
acute mitral regurgitation.
SONIDE, PRUSIDE, NIPRESS 50 mg in 5 ml inj.
ADRENERGIC NEURONE BLOCKERS
Reserpine It is an alkaloid from the roots of Rauwolfia
serpentina  (sarpgandha) indigenous to India which has been
used in ‘Ayurvedic’ medicine for centuries. The pure alkaloid
was isolated in 1955 and later found to act by causing CA
and 5-HT depletion. It was a popular antihypertensive of
the late 1950s and early 1960s, but is now used only as
a pharmacological tool.
Reserpine acts at the membrane of intraneuronal vesicles
which store monoamines (NA, DA, 5-HT) and irreversibly
inhibits the vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT2). The
monoamines are gradually depleted and degraded by MAO.
The effects last long after the drug is eliminated (hit and
run drug) because tissue CA stores are restored only gradually.
Higher doses deplete CAs and 5-HT in the brain as
well; cause sedation and mental depression. Antipsychoticeffect (mild) and extrapyramidal symptoms are produced due
to DA depletion.
SERPASIL 0.25 mg tab; 1 mg/ml inj.
Guanethidine It is a polar guanidine compound which
is taken up into the adrenergic nerve endings by
active amine transport, and has three important facets of
action:
(a) Displaces NA from storage granules stoichiometrically.
(b) Inhibits nerve impulse coupled release of NA.
(c) Engages and blocks NA uptake mechanism at the axonal
membrane.
Guanethidine has gone out of use now due to marked side
effects.
TREATMENT OF HYPERTENSION
The aim of antihypertensive therapy is to prevent
morbidity and mortality associated with persis-
tently raised BP by lowering it to an acceptable
level, with minimum inconvenience to the
patient. Both systolic and diastolic BP predict
the likelihood of target organ damage (TOD) and
complications such as:
(a) Cerebrovascular disease, transient ischaemic
attacks, stroke, encephalopathy.
(b) Hypertensive heart disease—left ventricular
hypertrophy, CHF.
(c) Coronary artery disease (CAD), angina, myo-
cardial infarction, sudden cardiac death.
(d) Arteriosclerotic peripheral vascular disease,
retinopathy.
(e) Dissecting aneurysm of aorta.
(f) Glomerulopathy, renal failure.
Patients who have already suffered some TOD
have greater risk of further organ damage and
death at any level of raised BP, than those without
TOD.
The JNC 7 (2003) has reclassified BP readings
as:
Since the risk of complications depends not
only on the level of BP, but also on other risk
factors (see box) and existing TOD, these have        BP (mm Hg)
BP classification Systolic Diastolic
 1. Normal <120 and <80
 2. Prehypertension 120–139or 80–89
 3. Hypertension Stage I 140–159or 90–99
 4. Hypertension Stage II  160 or  100Diuretics Chapter 41b
Diuretics (natriuretics) are drugs which cause a
net loss of Na+ and water in urine. However, Na+
balance is soon restored, even with continuing
diuretic action, by compensatory homeostatic
mechanisms of the body, albeit with a certain
degree of persisting Na+ deficit and reduction in
extracellular fluid volume.
Based on the diuretic action of calomel, organomercurials
given by injection were introduced in the 1920s and dominated
for nearly 40 years. The CAse inhibitors were developed
in the 1950s from the observation that early sulfonamides
caused acidosis and mild diuresis. The first modern orally
active diuretic chlorothiazide  was produced in 1957, and
by early 1960s its congeners (thiazide diuretics) were already
in common use. Availability of furosemide  and ethacrynic
acid by mid 1960s revolutionized the pattern of diuretic
use. The aldosterone antagonist and other K+ sparing diuretics
spironolactone  and triamterene/amiloride  were developed
in parallel to these.
Diuretics are among the most widely pres-
cribed drugs. Application of diuretics in the
management of hypertension has outstripped their
use in edema. Availability of diuretics has also
had a major impact on the understanding of renal
physiology.
CLASSIFICATION
1.High efficacy diuretics (Inhibitors of Na+-
K+-2Cl¯ cotransport)
Sulphamoyl derivatives
Furosemide, Bumetanide, Torasemide
2.Medium efficacy diuretics (Inhibitors of
Na+-Cl¯ symport)
(a)Benzothiadiazines (thiazides)
Hydrochlorothiazide, Benzthiazide,
Hydroflumethiazide, Bendroflumethiazide
(b)Thiazide like (related heterocyclics)
Chlorthalidone, Metolazone, Xipamide,
Indapamide, Clopamide3.Weak or adjunctive diuretics
(a)Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Acetazolamide
(b)Potassium sparing diuretics
(i)Aldosterone antagonist :
Spironolactone, Eplerenone
(ii)Inhibitors of renal epithelial Na+
channel: Triamterene, Amiloride.
(c)Osmotic diuretics
Mannitol, Isosorbide, Glycerol
Other high ceiling diuretics, viz. ethacrynic acid and
organomercurials (mersalyl)  are only historical.
HIGH CEILING (LOOP) DIURETICS
(Inhibitors of Na+-K+-2Cl¯ Cotransport)
Furosemide (Frusemide)  Prototype drug
The development of this rapidly acting highly
efficacious oral diuretic was a breakthrough. Its
maximal natriuretic effect is much greater than
that of other classes. The diuretic response goes
on increasing with increasing dose: upto 10 L
of urine may be produced in a day. It is active
even in patients with relatively severe renal failure.
The onset of action is prompt (i.v. 2–5 min., i.m.
10–20 min., oral 20–40 min.) and duration short
(3–6 hours).
The major site of action is the thick AscLH
(therefore called loop diuretics ) where furosemide
inhibits Na+- K+-2Cl¯ cotransport (site II, Fig.
41.1). A minor component of action on PT has also
been indicated. It is secreted in PT by organic anion
transport and reaches AscLH where it acts from
luminal side of the membrane. The cortico-
medullary osmotic gradient is abolished and
positive as well as negative free water clearance is
blocked. K+ excretion is increased mainly due to
high Na+ load reaching DT. However, at equinatri-
uretic doses, K+ loss is less than that with thiazides.635
CHAPTER 45HYPOLIPIDAEMIC DRUGS AND PLASMA EXPANDERS
TABLE 45.2 Types of primary hyperlipoproteinaemias
Type Disorder Cause Occurrence Elevated Plasma lipids
plasma
lipoprotein CH TG
I Familial lipoprotein G Very rare Chylomicron  
lipase deficiency
IIa Familial G Less common LDL N
hypercholesterolaemia
IIb Polygenic MF Commonest LDL N
hypercholesterolaemia
III Familial G Rare IDL, Chy. rem.
dysbetalipoproteinaemia
IV Hypertriglyceridaemia MF, G Common VLDL N
V Familial combined G Less common VLDL, LDL
hyperlipidaemia
CH—Cholesterol; TG—Triglycerides; G—Genetic; MF—Multifactorial; Chy. rem.—Chylomicron  remnants;
VLDL—Very low density lipoprotein; IDL—Intermediate density lipoprotein; LDL—Low density lipoprotein.
The genetic defect in some of the monogenic disorders is:
Type I : absence of lipoprotein lipase—TG in Chy cannot be utilized.
Type IIa : deficiency of LDL receptor—LDL and IDL are taken up very slowly by liver and tissues.
Type III : the apoprotein in IDL and Chy. rem. (apoE) is abnormal, these particles are cleared at a lower rate.
Type IV : this type of hypertriglyceridaemia is both multifactorial and monogenic, the former is more prevalent
than the latter.
The CHE of LDL is deesterified and used mainly for
cell membrane formation. The CH released into blood from
degradation of membranes is rapidly incorporated in high
density lipoproteins  (HDL), esterified with the help of an
enzyme lecithin: cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) and
transferred back to VLDL or IDL, completing the cycle.
The excess lipoproteins in plasma are phagocytosed by
macrophages for disposal. When too much of lipoproteins
have to be degraded in this manner, CH is deposited in
atheromas  (in arterial walls) and xanthomas  (in skin and
tendons). Raised levels of VLDL, IDL and LDL (rarely Chy
and Chy. rem. also) are atherogenic, while HDL may be
protective, because HDL facilitates removal of CH from tissues.
Hyperlipoproteinaemias can be:
(i)Secondary : associated with diabetes, myxo-
edema, nephrotic syndrome, chronic alcoholism,
drugs (corticosteroids, oral contraceptives, 
blockers) etc.
(ii)Primary: due to:
(a) A single gene defect: is familial and called
‘monogenic’ or genetic.
(b) Multiple genetic, dietary and physical acti-
vity related causes: ‘polygenic’ or multi-
factorial.On the whole, LDL is the primary carrier of plasma
CHE, and VLDL that of TGs. The important
features of major types of hyperlipoproteinaemias
are given in Table 45.2.
CLASSIFICATION
1.HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (Statins):
Lovastatin, Simvastatin, Pravastatin,
Atorvastatin, Rosuvastatin, Pitavastatin
2.Bile acid sequestrants (Resins):
Cholestyramine, Colestipol
3.Lipoprotein lipase activators (PPAR
activators, Fibrates):  Clofibrate, Gemfibrozil,
Bezafibrate, Fenofibrate.
4.Lipolysis and triglyceride synthesis
inhibitor:
Nicotinic acid.
5.Sterol absorption inhibitor:
Ezetimibe.
The mechanism of action and profile of lipid
lowering effect of important hypolipidaemic drugs
is summarized in Table 45.3.662
SECTION 11GASTROINTESTINAL DRUGS
Fig. 47.1: Major central and visceral structures involved in emesis and the neurohumoral receptors mediating
the emetic response.
NTS–Nucleus tractus solitarius; VC–Vomiting centre; CTZ—Chemoreceptor trigger zone; 5-HT3–5-HT3 receptor;
H1–Histamine H1 receptor; D2–Dopamine  2 receptor; M–Muscarinic receptor; NK1–Neurokinin1 receptor;
CB1–Cannabinoid 1 receptor
(c) Kerosine (petroleum) poisoning: chances of
aspiration of the liquid (due to low viscosity)
and chemical pneumonia are high.
(d) Unconscious patient: may aspirate the
vomitus, because laryngeal reflex is likely
to be impaired.
(e) Morphine or phenothiazine poisoning:
emetics may fail to act.
ANTIEMETICS
These are drugs used to prevent or suppress
vomiting.CLASSIFICATION
1.Anticholinergics Hyoscine, Dicyclomine
2.H1 antihistaminics Promethazine,
Diphenhydramine,
Dimenhydrinate,
Doxylamine,
Meclozine (Meclizine),
Cinnarizine.
3.Neuroleptics Chlorpromazine,
(D2 blockers) Triflupromazine,
Prochlorperazine,
Haloperidol, etc.663
CHAPTER 47ANTIEMETIC, PROKINETIC AND DIGESTANT DRUGS
4.Prokinetic drugs Metoclopramide,
Domperidone,
Cisapride, Mosapride,
Itopride
5.5-HT3 antagonists Ondansetron,
Granisetron,
Palonosetron,
Ramosetron
6. NK1 receptor Aprepitant,
antagonists Fosaprepitant
7.Adjuvant Dexamethasone,
antiemetics Benzodiazepines,
Dronabinol, Nabilone
ANTICHOLINERGICS (See Ch. 8)
Hyoscine (0.2–0.4 mg oral, i.m.) is the most
effective drug for motion sickness. However, it
has a brief duration of action; produces sedation,
dry mouth and other anticholinergic side effects;
suitable only for short brisk journies. Antiemetic
action is exerted probably by blocking conduction
of nerve impulses across a cholinergic link in the
pathway leading from the vestibular apparatus to
the vomiting centre and has poor efficacy in
vomiting of other etiologies.
A transdermal patch containing 1.5 mg of hyoscine, to
be delivered over 3 days has been developed. Applied behind
the pinna, it suppresses motion sickness while producing
only mild side effects.
Dicyclomine (10–20 mg oral) has been used
for prophylaxis of motion sickness and for
morning sickness. It has been cleared of
teratogenic potential.
H1 ANTIHISTAMINICS (See Ch. 11)
Some antihistaminics are antiemetic. They are
useful mainly in motion sickness and to a lesser
extent in morning sickness, postoperative and
some other forms of vomiting. Their antiemetic
effect appears to be based on anticholinergic,
antihistaminic, weak antidopaminergic and
sedative properties.
Promethazine, diphenhydramine, dimenhydri-
nateThese drugs afford protection of motion
sickness for 4–6 hours, but produce sedation and
dryness of mouth. By their central anticholinergicaction they block the extrapyramidal side effects
of metoclopramide while supplementing its anti-
emetic action. Promethazine is a phenothiazine;
has weak central antidopaminergic action as well.
Their combination has been used in chemotherapy
induced nausea and vomiting (CINV).
Promethazine theoclate (AVOMINE 25 mg tab.)
This salt of promethazine has been specially
promoted as an antiemetic, but the action does
not appear to be significantly different from
promethazine HCl.
Doxylamine It is a sedative H 1 antihistaminic
with prominent anticholinergic activity. Marketed
in combination with pyridoxine, it is specifically
promoted in India for ‘morning sickness’ (vomiting
of early pregnancy), although such use is not made
in UK and many other countries.
After over 2 decades of worldwide use of a combination
product of doxylamine for morning sickness, some reports
of foetal malformation appeared and the product was
withdrawn in 1981. Subsequent studies have both supported
and refuted its teratogenic potential. Though the US-FDA
and CSM in UK found no credible evidence of increase
in birth defects, they did not rule out the possibility. The
product remained suspended in these countries, probably to
avoid litigation, but not due to safety or efficacy concerns.
Recently, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists have recommended a combination of
doxylamine + pyridoxine as first line treatment of morning
sickness. However, it is still not used in U.K.
Oral absorption of doxylamine is slow, and its
t½ is 10 hr. The side effects are drowsiness, dry
mouth, vertigo and abdominal upset.
Dose: 10–20 mg at bed time; if needed additional doses
may be given in morning and afternoon.
DOXINATE, GRAVIDOX, VOMNEX, NOSIC 10 mg with
pyridoxine 10 mg tab.
Meclozine (meclizine) It is less sedative and
longer-acting; protects against sea sickness for
nearly 24 hours.
DILIGAN: meclozine 12.5 mg + nicotinic acid 50 mg tab;
PREGNIDOXIN: meclozine 25 mg + caffeine 20 mg tab.
Cinnarizine It is an antivertigo drug having
antimotion sickness property. It probably acts
by inhibiting influx of Ca2+ from endolymph into
the vestibular sensory cells which mediates
labyrinthine reflexes.Drugs for Constipation
and DiarrhoeaChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 4848484848
LAXATIVES
(Aperients, Purgatives, Cathartics)
These are drugs that promote evacuation of
bowels. A distinction is sometimes made according
to the intensity of action.
(a)Laxative or aperient : milder action,
elimination of soft but formed stools.
(b)Purgative or cathartic : stronger action
resulting in more fluid evacuation.
Many drugs in low doses act as laxative and in
larger doses as purgative.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Bulk forming
Dietary fibre: Bran, Psyllium (Plantago)
Ispaghula, Methylcellulose
2.Stool softener
Docusates (DOSS), Liquid paraffin
3.Stimulant purgatives
(a)Diphenylmethanes
Phenolphthalein, Bisacodyl, Sodium
picosulfate
(b)Anthraquinones (Emodins)
Senna, Cascara sagrada
(c)5-HT4 agonist
Prucalopride
(d)Fixed oil
Castor oil
4.Osmotic purgatives
Magnesium salts: sulfate, hydroxide
Sodium salts: sulfate, phosphate
Sod. pot. tartrate
Lactulose
MECHANISM OF ACTION
All purgatives increase the water content of the
faeces by:(a) A hydrophilic or osmotic action, retaining
water and electrolytes in the intestinal
lumen—increase volume of colonic content
and make it easily propelled.
(b) Acting on intestinal mucosa, decrease net
absorption of water and electrolyte; intestinal
transit is enhanced indirectly by the fluid
bulk.
(c) Increasing propulsive activity as primary
action—allowing less time for absorption of
salt and water as a secondary effect.
For some of the drugs, controversy continues as
to whether they increase water content of stools
as the primary action or it is a consequence of
increased motility, because the amount of water
absorbed largely depends on transit time.
However, certain purgatives do increase motility
through an action on the myenteric plexuses.
Laxatives modify the fluid dynamics of the
mucosal cell and may cause fluid accumulation
in gut lumen by one or more of following
mechanisms:
(a) Inhibiting Na+K+ATPase of villous cells —
impairing electrolyte and water absorption.
(b) Stimulating adenylyl cyclase in crypt cells —
increasing water and electrolyte secretion.
(c) Enhancing PG synthesis in mucosa which
increases secretion.
(d) Increasing NO synthesis which enhances
secretion and inhibits non-propulsive
contrations in colon.
(e) Structural injury to the absorbing intestinal
mucosal cells.
BULK PURGATIVES
Dietary fibre: bran Dietary fibre consists of
unabsorbable cell wall and other constituents of
vegetable food—cellulose, lignins, gums, pectins,689
CHAPTER 49GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
of 19th century and that they are the cause of many diseases;
Ehrlich toyed with the idea that if certain dyes could
selectively stain microbes, they could also be selectively toxic
to these organisms. He tried methylene blue, trypan red, etc.
He developed the arsenicals— atoxyl for sleeping sickness,
arsphenamine  in 1906 and neoarsphenamine in 1909 for
syphilis. He coined the term ‘chemotherapy’ because he used
drugs of known chemical structure (that of most other drugs
in use at that time was not known) and showed that selective
attenuation of infecting parasite was a practical proposition.
(c) The modern era of chemotherapy was ushered by Domagk
in 1935 by demonstrating the therapeutic effect of Prontosil,
a sulfonamide dye, in pyogenic infection. It was soon realized
that the active moiety was paraamino benzene sulfonamide,
and the dye part was not essential. Sulfapyridine (M & B
693) was the first sulfonamide to be marketed in 1938.
The phenomenon of antibiosis  was demonstrated by
Pasteur in 1877: growth of anthrax bacilli in urine was inhibited
by air-borne bacteria. Fleming (1929) found that a diffusible
substance was elaborated by Penicillium  mould which could
destroy Staphylococcus  on the culture plate. He named this
substance penicillin  but could not purify it. Chain and Florey
followed up this observation in 1939 which culminated in the
clinical use of penicillin in 1941. Because of the great potential
of this discovery in treating war wounds, commercial
manufacture of penicillin soon started.
In the 1940s, Waksman and his colleagues undertook
a systematic search of Actinomycetes as source of antibiotics
and discovered streptomycin  in 1944. This group of soil
microbes proved to be a treasure-house of antibiotics and
soon tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, erythromycin and many
others followed. All three groups of scientists, Domagk,
Fleming-Chain-Florey and Waksman received the Nobel Prize
for their discoveries.
In the past 50 years emphasis has shifted from searching
new antibiotic producing organisms to developing
semisynthetic derivatives of older antibiotics with more
desirable properties or differing spectrum of activity. Few
novel synthetic AMAs, e.g. fluoroquinolones, oxazolidinones
have also been produced.
CLASSIFICATION
Antimicrobial drugs can be classified in many
ways:
A. Chemical structure
1.Sulfonamides and related drugs : Sulfa-
diazine and others, Sulfones—Dapsone
(DDS), Paraaminosalicylic acid (PAS).
2.Diaminopyrimidines: Trimethoprim,
Pyrimethamine.
3.Quinolones: Nalidixic acid, Norfloxacin,
Ciprofloxacin, Prulifloxacin, etc.4.-Lactam antibiotics: Penicillins, Cepha-
losporins, Monobactams, Carbapenems.
5.Tetracyclines: Oxytetracycline, Doxy-
cycline, etc.
6.Nitrobenzene derivative:  Chloramp-
henicol.
7.Aminoglycosides:  Streptomycin, Genta-
micin, Amikacin, Neomycin, etc.
8.Macrolide antibiotics:  Erythromycin,
Clarithromycin, Azithromycin, etc.
9.Lincosamide antibiotics: Lincomycin,
Clindamycin.
10.Glycopeptide antibiotics: Vancomycin,
Teicoplanin.
11.Oxazolidinone:  Linezolid.
12.Polypeptide antibiotics:  Polymyxin-B,
Colistin, Bacitracin, Tyrothricin.
13.Nitrofuran derivatives:  Nitrofurantoin,
Furazolidone.
14.Nitroimidazoles: Metronidazole, Tinida-
zole, etc.
15.Nicotinic acid derivatives:  Isoniazid,
Pyrazinamide, Ethionamide.
16.Polyene antibiotics:  Nystatin, Amphote-
ricin-B, Hamycin.
17.Azole derivatives:  Miconazole, Clotrima-
zole, Ketoconazole, Fluconazole.
18.Others: Rifampin, Spectinomycin, Sod.
fusidate, Cycloserine, Viomycin, Ethambu-
tol, Thiacetazone, Clofazimine, Griseoful-
vin.
B. Mechanism of action
1.Inhibit cell wall synthesis : Penicillins,
Cephalosporins, Cycloserine, Vancomycin,
Bacitracin.
2.Cause leakage from cell membranes :
Polypeptides—Polymyxins, Colistin,
Bacitracin. Polyenes—Amphotericin B,
Nystatin, Hamycin.
3.Inhibit protein synthesis:  Tetracyclines,
Chloramphenicol, Erythromycin, Clinda-
mycin, Linezolid.
4.Cause misreading of m-RNA code and
affect permeability:  Aminoglycosides—
Streptomycin, Gentamicin, etc.721
CHAPTER 51BETA-LACTAM ANTIBIOTICS
2. Susceptibility to penicillinase.
3. Narrow spectrum of activity.
4. Hypersensitivity reactions (this has not
been overcome in any preparation).
In addition, some -lactamase inhibitors have
been developed which themselves are not anti-
bacterial, but augment the activity of penicillins
against -lactamase producing organisms.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Acid-resistant alternative to penicillin G
Phenoxymethyl penicillin (Penicillin V).
2.Penicillinase-resistant penicillins
Methicillin, Cloxacillin, Dicloxacillin.
3.Extended spectrum penicillins
(a)Aminopenicillins:  Ampicillin,
Bacampicillin, Amoxicillin.
(b)Carboxypenicillins : Carbenicillin.
(c)Ureidopenicillins : Piperacillin,
Mezlocillin.
-lactamase inhibitors Clavulanic acid
 Sulbactam, Tazobactam
ACID-RESISTANT ALTERNATIVE TO
PENICILLIN-G
Phenoxymethyl penicillin (Penicillin V)
It differs from PnG only in that it is acid stable.
Oral absorption is better; peak blood level is
reached in 1 hour and plasma t½ is 30–60 min.
The antibacterial spectrum of penicillin V
is identical to PnG, but it is about 1/5 as active
against Neisseria , other gram negative bacteria
and anaerobes. It cannot be depended upon for
more serious infections and is used only for
streptococcal pharyngitis, sinusitis, otitis media,
prophylaxis of rheumatic fever (when an oral
drug has to be selected), less serious pneumo-
coccal infections and trench mouth.
Dose: 250–500 mg, infants 60 mg, children 125–250 mg; given 6
hourly, (250 mg = 4 lac U). CRYSTAPEN-V, KAYPEN 125, 250
mg tab, 125 mg/5 ml dry syr—for reconstitution, PENIVORAL
65, 130 mg tab.PENICILLINASE-RESISTANT
PENICILLINS
These congeners have side chains that protect
the -lactam ring from attack by staphylococcal
penicillinase. However, this also partially protects
the bacteria from the -lactam ring: nonpenicilli-
nase producing organisms are  much less
sensitive to these drugs than to PnG. Their only
indication is infections caused by penicillinase
producing Staphylococci,  for which they are the
drugs of choice, except in areas where methicillin
resistant Staph. aureus (MRSA) has become
prevalent. These drugs are not resistant to -
lactamases produced by gram negative bacteria.
Methicillin It is highly penicillinase resistant but not acid
resistant—must be injected. It is also an inducer of
penicillinase production.
MRSA have emerged in many areas. These are insensitive
to all penicillinase-resistant penicillins and to other -lactams
as well as to erythromycin, aminoglycosides, tetracyclines,
etc. The MRSA have altered PBPs which do not bind
penicillins. The drug of choice for these organisms is
vancomycin/linezolid, but ciprofloxacin can also be used.
Haematuria, albuminuria and reversible interstitial
nephritis are the specific adverse effects of methicillin. It has
been replaced by cloxacillin.
Cloxacillin/Dicloxacillin It has an isoxazolyl
side chain and is highly penicillinase as well as
acid resistant. Activity against PnG sensitive
organisms is weaker, and it should not be used
as a substitute for PnG. It is more active than
methicillin against penicillinase producing Staph,
but not against MRSA.
Cloxacillin/dicloxacillin are incompletely
but dependably absorbed from oral route,
especially if taken in empty stomach. It is
> 90% plasma protein bound. Elimination occurs
primarily by kidney, also partly by liver. Plasma
t½ is about 1 hour.
Dose: 0.25–0.5 g orally every 6 hours; for severe infections
0.25–1 g may be injected i.m. or i.v.—higher blood levels are
produced.
KLOX, BIOCLOX, 0.25, 0.5 g cap; 0.25, 0.5 g/vial inj., CLOPEN
0.25, 0.5 g cap.
Oxacillin, Flucloxacillin (Floxacillin) are other isoxazolyl
penicillins, similar to cloxacillin, but not marketed in India.
Nafcillin is another parenteral penicillinase resistant penicillin.Antileprotic Drugs ChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 5656565656
Leprosy, caused by Mycobacterium leprae , has
been considered incurable since ages and bears
a social stigma. Due to availability of effective
antileprotic drugs now, it is entirely curable, but
deformities/defects already incurred may not
reverse.
Chaulmoogra oil with weak antileprotic property was used
in Indian medicine for centuries. Shortly after the
demonstration of antibacterial property of sulfonamides,
congeners were tested and dapsone, the parent sulfone, was
found to be an active antileprotic. Demonstration of its
efficacy in experimental tuberculosis and leprosy led to clinical
trials in the 1940s, and since then it is the sheet-anchor of
treatment of leprosy. Few other sulfones were added, but none
could excel dapsone. Clofazimine was inducted in the early
1960s as a useful adjunct, and soon rifampin, developed for
TB, was found to be a rapidly acting cidal drug for  M.leprae
as well. Lately good antileprotic activity has been detected
in some fluoroquinolones, macrolides and minocycline.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Sulfone Dapsone (DDS)
2.Phenazine derivative Clofazimine
3.Antitubercular drugs Rifampin,
Ethionamide
4.Other antibiotics Ofloxacin,
Moxifloxacin,
Minocycline,
Clarithromycin
Dapsone (DDS)
It is diamino diphenyl sulfone (DDS), the
simplest, oldest, cheapest, most active and most
commonly used member of its class. All other
sulfones have become obsolete.Activity and mechanism Dapsone is che-
mically related to sulfonamides and has the same
mechanism of action, i.e. inhibition of PABA
incorporation into folic acid by folate synthase.
The antibacterial action of dapsone is antagonized
by PABA. It is leprostatic at very low concentra-
tions, while growth of many other bacteria
sensitive to sulfonamides is arrested at relatively
higher concentrations. Specificity for M. leprae
may be due to difference in the affinity of its
folate synthase. Doses of dapsone needed for
treatment of acute pyogenic bacterial infections
are too toxic, so not used.
Dapsone-resistance among M. leprae , first
noted in 1964, has spread and has necessitated
the use of multidrug therapy (MDT). When
dapsone resistance is encountered in an untreated
patient, it is called ‘ primary’, and indicates that
the infection was contacted from a patient
harbouring resistant bacilli. Resistance which
develops during monotherapy in an individual
patient with dapsone is called ‘ secondary ’.The
incidence of primary dapsone resistance reported
from different parts of the world, from time-
to-time, has been variable; whereas secondary
dapsone resistance occurred in upto 20% patients
treated with monotherapy. The mechanism of
secondary resistance appears to be the same as
for M. tuberculosis,  i.e. selective propagation
of resistant bacilli over time. Dapsone resistant
M. leprae have mutated folate synthase which
has lower affinity for dapsone. However, the peak
serum concentration of dapsone after 100 mg/
day dose exceeds MIC for M. leprae  by nearly
500 times; it continues to be active against low
to moderately resistant bacilli, and the risk of
relapse due to dapsone resistance is reported
to be 2–3%. In addition to resistance, there is
the problem of ‘ persisters ’, that are drug
Antifungal Drugs ChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 5757575757
These are drugs used for superficial and deep
(systemic) fungal infections.
A disquietening trend after 1950s is the rising
prevalence of more sinister type of fungal
infections which are, to a large extent, iatrogenic.
Fungal infections are mostly associated with the
use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, cortico-
steroids, anticancer/immunosuppressant drugs,
dentures, indwelling catheters and implants, and
emergence of AIDS. As a result of breakdown
of host defence mechanisms by the above agents,
saprophytic fungi easily invade living tissue.
Many topical antifungals have been available
since the antiseptic era. Two important antibio-
tics viz. amphotericin B —to deal with systemic
mycosis, and griseofulvin —to supplement attack
on dermatophytes were introduced around 1960.
Antifungal property of flucytosine was noted in
1970, but it could serve only as a companion
drug to amphotericin. The development of
imidazoles in the mid 1970s and triazoles in
1980s has been an advancement. Terbinafine  is
a novel antifungal. A group of potent semisyn-
thetic antifungal antibiotics, the Echinocandins
are the latest addition.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Antibiotics
A.Polyenes: Amphotericin B (AMB),
Nystatin, Hamycin
B.Echinocandins :Caspofungin, Micafungin,
Anidulafungin
C.Heterocyclic benzofuran : Griseofulvin
2.Antimetabolite Flucytosine (5-FC)
3.Azoles
A.Imidazoles
Topical: Clotrimazole, Econazole,
Miconazole, Oxiconazole
Systemic: KetoconazoleB.Triazoles : Fluconazole,
(systemic) Itraconazole,
Voriconazole,
Posaconazole
4.Allylamine Terbinafine
5.Other topical agents
Tolnaftate, Undecylenic acid, Benzoic acid,
Quiniodochlor, Ciclopirox olamine, Butenafine,
Sod. thiosulfate.
POLYENE ANTIBIOTICS
The name polyene is derived from their highly
double-bonded structure. Amphotericin B is
described as the prototype.
Amphotericin B (AMB)
It is obtained from Streptomyces nodosus .
Chemistry and mechanism of action The
polyenes possess a macrocyclic ring, one side
of which has several conjugated double bonds
and is highly lipophilic, while the other side is
hydrophilic with many OH groups. A polar
aminosugar and a carboxylic acid group are
present at one end in some. They are all insoluble
in water and unstable in aqueous medium.
The polyenes have high affinity for
ergosterol present in fungal cell membrane. They
combine with it, get inserted into the membrane
and several polyene molecules together orient
themselves in such a way as to form a
‘micropore’. The hydrophilic side forms the
interior of the pore through which ions, amino
acids and other water-soluble substances move
out. The micropore is stabilized by membrane
sterols which fill up the spaces between the AMB
molecules on the lipophilic side—constituting
the outer surface of the pore. Thus, cell
permeability is markedly increased.Antiviral Drugs ChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 5858585858
Viruses are the ultimate expression of parasitism.
They not only take nutrition from the host cell but
also direct its metabolic machinery to synthesize
new virus particles. Viral chemotherapy, therefore
was considered impossible, as it would require
interference with cellular metabolism in the host.
However,  in the past 50 years virus directed
enzymes have been identified in the infected cell
and some viruses have few enzymes of their own
which may have higher affinities for some
antimetabolites or inhibitors than the regular
cellular enzymes. In addition, drugs have been
developed which target virus specific steps like
cell penetration, uncoating, reverse transcription,
virus assembly or maturation, etc. Another
stumbling block is that in majority of acute
infections viral replication is already at its peak
when symptoms appear. To be effective, therefore,
therapy has to be started in the incubation period,
i.e. has to be prophylactic or preemptive.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Anti-Herpes virus
Idoxuridine, Trifluridine, Acyclovir,
Valacyclovir, Famciclovir, Ganciclovir,
Valganciclovir, Cidofovir, Foscarnet,
Fomivirsen
2.Anti-Influenza virus
Amantadine, Rimantadine, Oseltamivir,
Zanamivir
3.Anti-Hepatitis virus/Nonselective antiviral
drugs
Primarily for hepatitis B: Lamivudine,
Adefovir dipivoxil, Tenofovir
Primarily for hepatitis C: Ribavirin,
Interferon 
4. Anti-Retrovirus
(a) Nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTIs) : Zidovudine (AZT),Didanosine, Stavudine,
Lamivudine, Abacavir, Emtricitabine,
Tenofovir (Nt RTI)
(b)Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NNRTIs) : Nevirapine, Efavi-
renz, Delavirdine
(c)Protease inhibitors : Ritonavir,
Atazanavir, Indinavir, Nelfinavir,
Saquinavir, Amprenavir, Lopinavir
(d)Entry (Fusion) inhibitor : Enfuvirtide
(e)CCR5 receptor inhibitor : Maraviroc
(f)Integrase inhibitor : Raltegravir
ANTI-HERPES VIRUS DRUGS
These are drugs active against the Herpes group
of DNA viruses which include Herpes simplex
virus-1 (HSV-1), Herpes simplex virus-2
(HSV2), Varicella-Zoster virus (VZV), Epstein-
Barr virus (EBV), and Cytomegalovirus  (CMV).
Idoxuridine It is 5-iodo-2-deoxyuridine (IUDR), which acts
as a thymidine analogue. It was the first pyrimidine
antimetabolite to be used as antiviral drug. It competes with
thymidine, gets incorporated in DNA so that faulty DNA is
formed which breaks down easily. It is effective only against
DNA viruses and clinical utility is limited to topical treatment
of Herpes simplex keratitis. Because of low virus selectivity,
higher local toxicity and rapid development of viral resistance,
use of idoxuridine is restricted to superficial dendritic keratitis
when rapid action is required. Idoxuridine eye drops act faster
than acyclovir eye ointment, which is more effective when
there is stromal involvement of the cornea. Ocular irritation
occurs with idoxuridine eye drops.
Dose: 0.1% eye drops to be instilled hourly, then 2 hourly
and 4 hourly; apply 0.1% eye ointment at night.
IDURIN, TOXIL 0.1% eye drops and eye oint.
Trifluridine It is a fluorinated nucleoside which acts in the
same way as idoxuridine, and inhibits HSV-1, HSV-2, CMV
and related viruses. However, virus selectivity is low and DNA
synthesis in host cells is also affected. In India trifluridine
eye drop is approved for use in H. simplex keratitis. Higher
efficacy than idoxuridine eye drops is reported. Ocular irritation
and lid edema can occur.Antimalarial Drugs ChapterChapterChapterChapterChapter 5959595959
These are drugs used for prophylaxis, treatment
and prevention of relapses of malaria.
Malaria, caused by 4 species of the protozoal
parasite Plasmodium , is endemic in most parts
of India and other tropical countries. It is one
of the major health problems. As per latest WHO
estimates (2011)* between 149–274 (median
216) million clinical cases and ~ 0.655 million
deaths occur globally due to malaria each year,
90% of which are in Africa. This amounts to
one malaria death every minute. In India the
National Malaria Eradication Programme
(NMEP), started in 1958, achieved near complete
disappearance of the disease in 1960s (from 75
million cases in 1950s to 0.1 million cases in
1960s). However, due to the development of
insecticide resistance among mosquitoes and
other factors, it staged a comeback in the mid
1970s (6.47 million cases in 1976), and
continues to prevail in endemic/subendemic
proportions, so that 80% indian population lives
in malaria risk areas. Conceding that eradication
of malaria is not possible, NMEP was renamed
National Antimalaria Programme (NAMP), which
now is ‘National vector borne diseases control
programme’ (NVBDCP) with a wider disease
coverage. For the year 2010, the NVBDCP has
reported 1.49 million slide proven malaria cases
in India, out of which 0.78 million (52%) were
falciparum malaria with 767 recorded deaths.
The WHO estimates that actual number of
malaria cases in India is much higher, and an
expert committee has estimated that about
40,000 malaria deaths occur annually.
The bark of Cinchona  tree, growing in Peru, was introduced
in Europe in the early 17th century as a cure for fevers. Later
it was realized to be a specific remedy for malaria. Quinine,
isolated from Cinchona  bark in 1820, replaced the crudepreparation and continued to be the major antimalarial drug
till 1942. The world’s supply of Cinchona  bark for producing
quinine was met by Java and neighbouring countries. This
was cut off from the Germans during World War I and from
the Allies during World War II. Due to enormous military
importance of malaria and its treatment, intense activity was
initiated for the development of antimalarial drugs. Mepacrine
was produced in Germany in 1926 and extensively field tested
by the Allies during World War II. Chloroquine  was produced
in USA soon after as a less toxic alternative to mepacrine.
It had already been synthesized and used by Germans in 1934
as ‘Resochin’. Proguanil was introduced in 1945 by the British
as a well tolerated clinical curative.
None of the above drugs were found to be capable of
preventing relapses in vivax malaria. Pamaquine  was the first
8-aminoquinoline to be tested in Germany in the 1920s.
However, no attention was paid to it because of its poor
schizontocide action. This class of drugs was retested during
World War II as radical curative and Primaquine  emerged
as the most desirable drug. Pyrimethamine  was produced in
1951 under a planned post-war research programme for
antimalarial drugs. Subsequently, chloroquine resistance
emerged in P. falciparum and several drugs were developed
to combat it; the important ones are Mefloquine, Lumefantrine ,
Atovaquone, Pyronaridine, etc. However, the most significant
advance is the Chinese herb derived fast acting Artemisinin
compounds, the latest one of which is a synthetic derivative
Arterolane  developed in India.
CLASSIFICATION
1.4-Aminoquinolines Chloroquine (CQ)
Amodiaquine (AQ)
Piperaquine
2.Quinoline-methanol Mefloquine
3.Cinchona alkaloid Quinine, Quinidine
4.Biguanide Proguanil
(Chloroguanide)
5.Diaminopyrimidine Pyrimethamine
6.8-Aminoquinoline Primaquine
Tafenoquine
7.Sulfonamides Sulfadoxine
and sulfone Sulfamethopyrazine
Dapsone * WHO: World Malaria Report, Dec. 2011817
CHAPTER 59ANTIMALARIAL DRUGS
8.Antibiotics Tetracycline
Doxycycline
Clindamycin
9.Sesquiterpine Artesunate
lactones Artemether
Arteether
Arterolane
10.Amino alcohols Halofantrine
Lumefantrine
11.Naphthyridine Pyronaridine
12.Naphthoquinone AtovaquoneOBJECTIVES AND USE OF
ANTIMALARIAL DRUGS
The aims of using drugs in relation to malarial
infection are:
(i) To prevent clinical attack of malaria
(prophylactic).
(ii) To treat clinical attack of malaria (clinical
curative).
(iii) To completely eradicate the parasite from
the patient’s body (radical curative).
(iv) To cutdown human-to-mosquito transmis-
sion (gametocidal).
Fig. 59.1: The life cycle of malarial parasite in man. Stages  and forms of
the parasite at which different types of antimalarial drugs act are indicated.
838
SECTION 12ANTIMICROBIAL DRUGS
• Less frequent side effects are—headache,
glossitis, dryness of mouth and dizziness.
• Urticaria, flushing, heat, itching, rashes and
fixed drug eruption occur in allergic subjects,
warrant discontinuation of the drug and
preclude future use of nitroimidazoles.
• Prolonged administration may cause peri-
pheral neuropathy and CNS effects. Seizures
have followed very high doses. Leucopenia
is likely with repeated courses.
• Thrombophlebitis of the injected vein occurs
if the solution is not well diluted.
Contraindications Metronidazole is contraindi-
cated in neurological disease, blood dyscrasias,
first trimester of pregnancy (though no terato-
genic effect has yet been demonstrated, its
mutagenic potential warrants caution). Cautious
use in chronic alcoholics.
Interactions A disulfiram-like intolerance to
alcohol occurs in some patients taking metro-
nidazole.
Alcohol-metronidazole interaction occurs only in some
individuals, while majority of those taking it can consume
alcohol without any reaction. There is no convincing evidence
of disulfiram-like action of metronidazole, but manufactures
advise caution in drinking during metronidazole therapy.
Enzyme inducers (phenobarbitone, rifampin)
may reduce its therapeutic effect.
Cimetidine can reduce metronidazole meta-
bolism: its dose may need to be decreased.
Metronidazole enhances warfarin action by
inhibiting its metabolism. It can decrease renal
elimination of lithium and precipitate toxicity.
Preparations
FLAGYL, METROGYL, METRON, ARISTOGYL ALDEZOLE
200, 400 mg tab, 200 mg/5 ml susp. (as benzoyl metronidazole:
tasteless); 500 mg/100 ml i.v. infusion; UNIMEZOL 200, 400 mg
tabs, 200 mg/5 ml susp. METROGYL GEL, LUPIGYL GEL: 1%
gel for vaginal/topical use.
Uses
1.Amoebiasis : Metronidazole is a first line
drug for all forms of amoebic infection. Many
dosage regimens have been tried; the current
recommendations are:For invasive dysentery and liver abscess—800
mg TDS (children 30–50 mg/kg/day) for 7–10
days.
In severe cases of amoebic dysentery or liver
abscess 500 mg may be infused i.v. slowly every
6–8 hours for 7–10 days or till oral therapy
can be instituted.
For mild intestinal disease—400 mg TDS for
5–7 days. Metronidazole is less effective than
many luminal amoebicides in eradicating
amoebic cysts from the colon, because it is
nearly completely absorbed from the upper
bowel.
2.Giardiasis It is highly effective in a dose
of 400 mg TDS for 7 days. A shorter course
of 3 days with 2 g/day is equally effective.
3.Trichomonas vaginitis It is the drug of
choice; 2.0 g single dose is preferred. Alterna-
tively 400 mg BD–TDS may be used for 7 days.
Additional intravaginal treatment is needed only
in refractory cases. Repeated courses may be
necessary in some patients, but should be given
with gaps of 4–6 weeks. The male partner should
be treated concurrently in cases of recurrent
infections.
Nonspecific bacterial vaginosis also responds.
4.Anaerobic bacterial infections They
occur mostly after colorectal or pelvic surgery,
appendicectomy, etc. Brain abscesses and
endocarditis may be caused by anaerobic
organisms.
Metronidazole is an effective drug for these
and is generally used in combination with
gentamicin or cephalosporins (many are mixed
infections). For serious cases i.v. administration
is recommended: 15 mg/kg infused over 1 hr
followed by 7.5 mg/kg every 6 hrs till oral
therapy can be instituted with 400–800 mg TDS.
Prophylactic use  in high risk situations
(colorectal/biliary surgery) is recommended.
Other drugs effective in anaerobic infections are
clindamycin and chloramphenicol.
5.Pseudomembranous enterocolitis due to
Cl. difficile  is generally associated with use of858
SECTION 13CHEMOTHERAPY OF NEOPLASTIC DISEASES
apparent cure, especially in early breast, lung and
colonic cancers.
CLASSIFICATION
A. Cytotoxic drugs
1.Alkylating agents Mechlorethamine
Nitrogen mustards (Mustine HCl)
Cyclophosphamide,
Ifosfamide,
Chlorambucil,
Melphalan
Ethylenimine Thio-TEPA
Alkyl sulfonate Busulfan
Nitrosoureas Carmustine (BCNU),
Lomustine (CCNU)
Triazine Dacarbazine (DTIC),
Temozolomide
Methylhydrazine Procarbazine
2.Platinum Cisplatin,
coordination Carboplatin,
complexes Oxaliplatin
3.Antimetabolites
Folate Methotrexate (Mtx)
antagonist Pemetrexed
Purine 6-Mercaptopurine (6-MP),
antagonist 6-Thioguanine (6-TG),
Azathioprine, Fludarabine
Pyrimidine 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU),
antagonist Capecitabine, Cytarabine
(cytosine arabinoside)
4.Microtubule Vincristine (Oncovin),
damaging Vinblastine, Vinorelbine
agents Paclitaxel, Docetaxel
Estramustine
5.Topoisomerase-2 Etoposide
inhibitors
6.Topoisomerase-1 Topotecan,
inhibitors Irinotecan
7.Antibiotics Actinomycin D
(Dactinomycin),
Doxorubicin,
Daunorubicin
(Rubidomycin),
Epirubicin,
Mitoxantrone,
Bleomycins,
Mitomycin C8.Miscellaneous Hydroxyurea,
L-Asparaginase,
Tretinoin,
Arsenic trioxide
B. Targeted drugs
1.Tyrosine protein- Imatinib,
kinase inhibitors Nilotinib
2.EGF receptor Gefitinib, Erlotinib
inhibitors Cetuximab
3.Angiogenesis Bevacizumab
inhibitors Sunitinib
4.Proteasome Bortezomib
inhibitor
5.Unarmed Rituximab,
monoclonal Trastuzumab
antibody
C. Hormonal drugs
1.Glucocorticoids Prednisolone and
others
2.Estrogens Fosfestrol,
Ethinylestradiol
3.Selective estrogen Tamoxifen,
receptor modulators Toremifene
4.Selective estrogen Fulvestrant
receptor down
regulators
5.Aromatase Letrozole,
inhibitors Anastrozole,
Exemestane
6.Antiandrogen Flutamide,
Bicalutamide
7.5- reductase Finasteride,
inhibitor Dutasteride
8.GnRH analogues Nafarelin, Leuprorelin
Triptorelin
9.Progestins Hydroxyprogesterone
acetate, etc.
GENERAL TOXICITY OF
CYTOTOXIC DRUGS
Majority of the cytotoxic drugs have more
profound effect on rapidly multiplying cells,
because the most important target of action are
the nucleic acids and their precursors, and rapid898
SECTION 14MISCELLANEOUS DRUGS
•Period of contact with the microorganism.
•Nature of microbe involved.
•Size of innoculum.
•Presence of blood, pus or other organic
matter.
Potency of a germicide is generally expressed
by its phenol coefficient  or Rideal Walker
coefficient , which is the ratio of the minimum
concentration of test drug required to kill a 24
hour culture of B. typhosa  in 7.5 minute at 37.5°C
to that of phenol under similar conditions. This
test has only limited validity, particularly in
relation to antiseptics which have to be tested
on living surfaces.
Therapeutic index  of an antiseptic is defined
by comparing the concentration at which it acts
on microorganisms with that which produces local
irritation, tissue damage or interference with
healing.
CLASSIFICATION
1.Phenol derivatives : Phenol, Cresol,
Hexylresorcinol, Chloroxylenol,
Hexachlorophene.
2.Oxidizing agents : Pot. permangnate,
Hydrogen peroxide, Benzoyl peroxide.
3.Halogens :Iodine, Iodophores, Chlorine,
Chlorophores.
4.Biguanide :Chlorhexidine.
5.Quaternary ammonium (Cationic):  Cetri-
mide, Benzalkonium chloride, Dequalinium
chloride.
6.Soaps:of Sod. and Pot.
7.Alcohols :Ethanol, Isopropanol.
8.Aldehydes : Formaldehyde, Glutaraldehyde.
9.Acids:Boric acid, Acetic acid.
10.Metallic salts : Silver nitrate, Silver
sulfadiazine, Mild silver protein, Zinc
sulfate, Calamine, Zinc oxide.
11.Dyes: Gentian violet, Acriflavine, Proflavine.
12.Furan derivative : Nitrofurazone.1. PHENOLS
Phenol (Carbolic acid) It is one of the earliest
used antiseptics and still the standard for com-
paring other germicides. It is a relatively weak
agent (static at 0.2%, cidal at >1%, poor action
on bacterial spores). It is a general protoplasmic
poison, injuring microbes and tissue cells alike—
at higher concentrations causes skin burns and
is a caustic. It acts by disrupting bacterial
membranes and denaturing bacterial proteins.
Organic matter diminishes its action slightly while
alkalies and soaps do so profoundly (carbolic
soaps are not more germicidal than soap itself).
It is now seldom employed as an antiseptic, but
being cheap, it is used to disinfect urine, faeces,
pus, sputum of patients and is sometimes included
in antipruritic preparations because of its mild
local anaesthetic action.
Cresol It is methyl-phenol; more active (3–10
times) and less damaging to tissues. Used for
disinfection of utensils, excreta and for washing
hands.
LYSOL is a 50% soapy emulsion of cresol.
Hexylresorcinol It is a more potent derivative of the
phenolic compound resorcinol that is odourless and
nonstaining; used as mouthwash, lozenge and as anti-
fungal.
Chloroxylenol It has a phenol coefficient of
70; does not coagulate proteins, is noncorrosive,
nonirritating to intact skin, but efficacy is reduced
by organic matter. It is poorly water soluble; the
commercial 4.8% solution ( DETTOL) is prepared
in 9% terpinol and 13% alcohol; used for surgical
antisepsis. A 0.8% skin cream and soap, 1.4%
lubricating obstetric cream (for vaginal examina-
tion, use on forceps, etc.), and a mouthwash
(DETTOLIN 1% with menthol 0.45% ) are also available.
These preparations lose activity if diluted with
water and kept for a time.
Hexachlorophene This chlorinated phenol
acts by inhibiting bacterial enzymes and (in high
concentration) causing bacterial lysis. It is
odourless, nonirritating and does not stain. Its
activity is reduced by organic matter but not by